  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or
no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I
thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It
is a way I have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp,
drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing
before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet;
and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it
requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping
into the street, and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account
it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol
and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I
quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they but
knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very
nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by wharves as
Indian isles by coral reefs—commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and
left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme downtown is the battery,
where that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled by breezes, which a few
hours previous were out of sight of land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers
there.

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from Corlears Hook
to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you
see?—Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon
thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the
spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of
ships from China; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a
still better seaward peep. But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in
lath and plaster—tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How
then is this? Are the green fields gone? What do they here?

But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly
bound for a dive. Strange! Nothing will content them but the extremest limit
of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not
suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without
falling in. And there they stand—miles of them—leagues. Inlanders all, they
come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues—north, east, south, and west.
Yet here they all unite. Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of
the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?

Once more. Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. Take almost
any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves
you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. Let the most absent-
minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries—stand that man on his legs,
set his feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there
be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst in the great American
desert, try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a
metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are
wedded for ever.

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
Saco. What is the chief element he employs? There stand his trees, each with a
hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and here sleeps his
meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping
spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue. But though the picture lies
thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon
this shepherd’s head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd’s eye were fixed
upon the magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, when for
scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies—what is the
one charm wanting?—Water—there is not a drop of water there! Were Niagara but
a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it? Why did
the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver,
deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or invest his
money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach? Why is almost every robust
healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to
go to sea? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel
such a mystical vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out
of sight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why did the
Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely all this is
not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus,
who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image he saw in the
fountain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that same image, we ourselves
see in all rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of
life; and this is the key to it all.

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to
grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not
mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to go as a
passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless you
have something in it. Besides, passengers get sea-sick—grow quarrelsome—don’t
sleep of nights—do not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;—no, I never
go as a passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea
as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I abominate all honorable
respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind whatsoever. It is
quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking care of
ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not. And as for going as
cook,—though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a
sort of officer on ship-board—yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling
fowls;—though once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and
peppered, there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to say
reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous
dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that
you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast, plumb
down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head. True, they
rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, like a
grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant
enough. It touches one’s sense of honor, particularly if you come of an old
established family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or
Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just previous to putting your hand into
the tar-pot, you have been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the
tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and
the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off in time.

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and
sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in
the scales of the New Testament? Do you think the archangel Gabriel thinks
anything the less of me, because I promptly and respectfully obey that old
hunks in that particular instance? Who ain’t a slave? Tell me that. Well,
then, however the old sea-captains may order me about—however they may thump
and punch me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;
that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way—either in
a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump
is passed round, and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blades, and be
content.

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of paying me
for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever
heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And there is all
the difference in the world between paying and being paid. The act of paying
is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves
entailed upon us. But _being paid_ ,—what will compare with it? The urbane
activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering
that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and
that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we
consign ourselves to perdition!

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome exercise and
pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world, head winds are far
more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate the
Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck
gets his atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He
thinks he breathes it first; but not so. In much the same way do the
commonalty lead their leaders in many other things, at the same time that the
leaders little suspect it. But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly
smelt the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on
a whaling voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some
unaccountable way—he can better answer than any one else. And, doubtless, my
going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence
that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in as a sort of brief interlude and
solo between more extensive performances. I take it that this part of the bill
must have run something like this:

“ _Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States._ “WHALING
VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the Fates,
put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when others were set
down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy parts in
genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces—though I cannot tell why this was
exactly; yet, now that I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a
little into the springs and motives which being cunningly presented to me
under various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,
besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my
own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
himself. Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity.
Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk; the
undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all the attending
marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my
wish. With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements;
but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. I
love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what
is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with
it—would they let me—since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the
inmates of the place one lodges in.

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that
swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost soul,
endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them all, one grand hooded
phantom, like a snow hill in the air.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag.

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and
started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto,
I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was a Saturday night in December. Much was I
disappointed upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already
sailed, and that no way of reaching that place would offer, till the following
Monday.

As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at this
same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well be related
that I, for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was made up to sail in
no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a fine, boisterous
something about everything connected with that famous old island, which
amazingly pleased me. Besides though New Bedford has of late been gradually
monopolising the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old
Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original—the
Tyre of this Carthage;—the place where the first dead American whale was
stranded. Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the
Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan? And where
but from Nantucket, too, did that first adventurous little sloop put forth,
partly laden with imported cobblestones—so goes the story—to throw at the
whales, in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from
the bowsprit?

Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me in New
Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a matter of
concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a very dubious-
looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless. I
knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and
only brought up a few pieces of silver,—So, wherever you go, Ishmael, said I
to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag, and
comparing the gloom towards the north with the darkness towards the
south—wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear
Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price, and don’t be too particular.

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of “The Crossed
Harpoons”—but it looked too expensive and jolly there. Further on, from the
bright red windows of the “Sword-Fish Inn,” there came such fervent rays, that
it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from before the house, for
everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic
pavement,—rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against the flinty
projections, because from hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were
in a most miserable plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing
one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of the
tinkling glasses within. But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don’t you hear?
get away from before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way. So on
I went. I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward, for
there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.

Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand, and here
and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At this hour of the
night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of the town proved all but
deserted. But presently I came to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide
building, the door of which stood invitingly open. It had a careless look, as
if it were meant for the uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I
did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the
flying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city,
Gomorrah? But “The Crossed Harpoons,” and “The Sword-Fish?”—this, then must
needs be the sign of “The Trap.” However, I picked myself up and hearing a
loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door.

It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred black faces
turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was
beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church; and the preacher’s text was
about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and teeth-
gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment
at the sign of ‘The Trap!’

Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks, and
heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a swinging sign over
the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representing a tall straight
jet of misty spray, and these words underneath—“The Spouter Inn:—Peter
Coffin.”

Coffin?—Spouter?—Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought I. But
it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this Peter here is
an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and the place, for the
time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated little wooden house itself
looked as if it might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt
district, and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it,
I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea
coffee.

It was a queer sort of place—a gable-ended old house, one side palsied as it
were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that
tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about
poor Paul’s tossed craft. Euroclydon, nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant
zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.
“In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,” says an old writer—of
whose works I possess the only copy extant—“it maketh a marvellous difference,
whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on
the outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where the
frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only glazier.”
True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my mind—old black-letter,
thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the
house. What a pity they didn’t stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and
thrust in a little lint here and there. But it’s too late to make any
improvements now. The universe is finished; the copestone is on, and the chips
were carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth
against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his
shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his
mouth, and yet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon!
says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper—(he had a redder one afterwards)
pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty night; how Orion glitters; what northern
lights! Let them talk of their oriental summer climes of everlasting
conservatories; give me the privilege of making my own summer with my own
coals.

But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up to the
grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here? Would
he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the line of the equator; yea,
ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost?

Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the door
of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be moored to one
of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar in an ice palace
made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a temperance society, he only
drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there is
plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet, and
see what sort of a place this “Spouter” may be.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide, low,
straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks
of some condemned old craft. On one side hung a very large oilpainting so
thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the unequal crosslights by
which you viewed it, it was only by diligent study and a series of systematic
visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way
arrive at an understanding of its purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades
and shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in
the time of the New England hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched.
But by dint of much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings,
and especially by throwing open the little window towards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild,
might not be altogether unwarranted.

But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous, black
mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over three blue, dim,
perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy
picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted. Yet was there a sort
of indefinite, half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly
froze you to it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out
what that marvellous painting meant. Ever and anon a bright, but, alas,
deceptive idea would dart you through.—It’s the Black Sea in a midnight
gale.—It’s the unnatural combat of the four primal elements.—It’s a blasted
heath.—It’s a Hyperborean winter scene.—It’s the breaking-up of the icebound
stream of Time. But at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous
something in the picture’s midst. _That_ once found out, and all the rest were
plain. But stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish? even
the great leviathan himself?

In fact, the artist’s design seemed this: a final theory of my own, partly
based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whom I conversed
upon the subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner in a great hurricane;
the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three dismantled masts alone
visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft,
is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.

The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish array of
monstrous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with glittering teeth
resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of human hair; and one
was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round like the segment made in
the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and
wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-
harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying implement. Mixed with these were
rusty old whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed. Some were
storied weapons. With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years
ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And
that harpoon—so like a corkscrew now—was flung in Javan seas, and run away
with by a whale, years afterwards slain off the Cape of Blanco. The original
iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body
of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the
hump.

Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way—cut through what
in old times must have been a great central chimney with fireplaces all
round—you enter the public room. A still duskier place is this, with such low
ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you would
almost fancy you trod some old craft’s cockpits, especially of such a howling
night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously. On one side
stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled
with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world’s remotest nooks. Projecting
from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den—the bar—a rude
attempt at a right whale’s head. Be that how it may, there stands the vast
arched bone of the whale’s jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive beneath
it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters, bottles,
flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by
which name indeed they called him), bustles a little withered old man, who,
for their money, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.

Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. Though true
cylinders without—within, the villanous green goggling glasses deceitfully
tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians rudely pecked into
the glass, surround these footpads’ goblets. Fill to _this_ mark, and your
charge is but a penny; to _this_ a penny more; and so on to the full glass—the
Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling.

Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about a
table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of _skrimshander_. I sought
the landlord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with a room,
received for answer that his house was full—not a bed unoccupied. “But avast,”
he added, tapping his forehead, “you haint no objections to sharing a
harpooneer’s blanket, have ye? I s’pose you are goin’ a-whalin’, so you’d
better get used to that sort of thing.”

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should ever do
so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that if he (the
landlord) really had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not
decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander further about a strange town
on so bitter a night, I would put up with the half of any decent man’s
blanket.

“I thought so. All right; take a seat. Supper?—you want supper? Supper’ll be
ready directly.”

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
Battery. At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with his
jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space between his
legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but he didn’t make
much headway, I thought.

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an adjoining
room. It was cold as Iceland—no fire at all—the landlord said he couldn’t
afford it. Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet. We
were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and hold to our lips cups of
scalding tea with our half frozen fingers. But the fare was of the most
substantial kind—not only meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens!
dumplings for supper! One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself
to these dumplings in a most direful manner.

“My boy,” said the landlord, “you’ll have the nightmare to a dead sartainty.”

“Landlord,” I whispered, “that aint the harpooneer is it?”

“Oh, no,” said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, “the harpooneer is a
dark complexioned chap. He never eats dumplings, he don’t—he eats nothing but
steaks, and he likes ’em rare.”

“The devil he does,” says I. “Where is that harpooneer? Is he here?”

“He’ll be here afore long,” was the answer.

I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this “dark
complexioned” harpooneer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so turned
out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into bed before I
did.

Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not what
else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the evening as a
looker on.

Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting up, the landlord cried,
“That’s the Grampus’s crew. I seed her reported in the offing this morning; a
three years’ voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys; now we’ll have the latest
news from the Feegees.”

A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung open, and
in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. Enveloped in their shaggy watch
coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, all bedarned and
ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears
from Labrador. They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first
house they entered. No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the
whale’s mouth—the bar—when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating,
soon poured them out brimmers all round. One complained of a bad cold in his
head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses,
which he swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever,
never mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador,
or on the weather side of an ice-island.

The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even with the
arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began capering about most
obstreperously.

I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though he
seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober
face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much noise as the rest.
This man interested me at once; and since the sea-gods had ordained that he
should soon become my shipmate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as
this narrative is concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of
him. He stood full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like
a coffer-dam. I have seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply
brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in the
deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to give
him much joy. His voice at once announced that he was a Southerner, and from
his fine stature, I thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from the
Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia. When the revelry of his companions had mounted
to its height, this man slipped away unobserved, and I saw no more of him till
he became my comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was missed by
his shipmates, and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with
them, they raised a cry of “Bulkington! Bulkington! where’s Bulkington?” and
darted out of the house in pursuit of him.

It was now about nine o’clock, and the room seeming almost supernaturally
quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate myself upon a little plan
that had occurred to me just previous to the entrance of the seamen.

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal rather
not sleep with your own brother. I don’t know how it is, but people like to be
private when they are sleeping. And when it comes to sleeping with an unknown
stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger a harpooneer,
then your objections indefinitely multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason
why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for
sailors no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore. To
be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own
hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.

The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the thought of
sleeping with him. It was fair to presume that being a harpooneer, his linen
or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the tidiest, certainly none
of the finest. I began to twitch all over. Besides, it was getting late, and
my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going bedwards. Suppose now, he
should tumble in upon me at midnight—how could I tell from what vile hole he
had been coming?

“Landlord! I’ve changed my mind about that harpooneer.—I shan’t sleep with
him. I’ll try the bench here.”

“Just as you please; I’m sorry I can’t spare ye a tablecloth for a mattress,
and it’s a plaguy rough board here”—feeling of the knots and notches. “But
wait a bit, Skrimshander; I’ve got a carpenter’s plane there in the bar—wait,
I say, and I’ll make ye snug enough.” So saying he procured the plane; and
with his old silk handkerchief first dusting the bench, vigorously set to
planing away at my bed, the while grinning like an ape. The shavings flew
right and left; till at last the plane-iron came bump against an
indestructible knot. The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him
for heaven’s sake to quit—the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not
know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank.
So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them into the
great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business, and left me
in a brown study.

I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too short;
but that could be mended with a chair. But it was a foot too narrow, and the
other bench in the room was about four inches higher than the planed one—so
there was no yoking them. I then placed the first bench lengthwise along the
only clear space against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my
back to settle down in. But I soon found that there came such a draught of
cold air over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never
do at all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one
from the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the
immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the night.

The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn’t I steal a march
on him—bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the
most violent knockings? It seemed no bad idea; but upon second thoughts I
dismissed it. For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I
popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all
ready to knock me down!

Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of spending a
sufferable night unless in some other person’s bed, I began to think that
after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown
harpooneer. Thinks I, I’ll wait awhile; he must be dropping in before long.
I’ll have a good look at him then, and perhaps we may become jolly good
bedfellows after all—there’s no telling.

But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes, and
going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.

“Landlord!” said I, “what sort of a chap is he—does he always keep such late
hours?” It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.

The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be mightily
tickled at something beyond my comprehension. “No,” he answered, “generally
he’s an early bird—airley to bed and airley to rise—yes, he’s the bird what
catches the worm. But to-night he went out a peddling, you see, and I don’t
see what on airth keeps him so late, unless, may be, he can’t sell his head.”

“Can’t sell his head?—What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are
telling me?” getting into a towering rage. “Do you pretend to say, landlord,
that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed Saturday night, or
rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around this town?”

“That’s precisely it,” said the landlord, “and I told him he couldn’t sell it
here, the market’s overstocked.”

“With what?” shouted I.

“With heads to be sure; ain’t there too many heads in the world?”

“I tell you what it is, landlord,” said I quite calmly, “you’d better stop
spinning that yarn to me—I’m not green.”

“May be not,” taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, “but I rayther
guess you’ll be done _brown_ if that ere harpooneer hears you a slanderin’ his
head.”

“I’ll break it for him,” said I, now flying into a passion again at this
unaccountable farrago of the landlord’s.

“It’s broke a’ready,” said he.

“Broke,” said I—“ _broke_ , do you mean?”

“Sartain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, I guess.”

“Landlord,” said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a snow-
storm—“landlord, stop whittling. You and I must understand one another, and
that too without delay. I come to your house and want a bed; you tell me you
can only give me half a one; that the other half belongs to a certain
harpooneer. And about this harpooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist
in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories tending to beget in
me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow—a
sort of connexion, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the
highest degree. I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the night
with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay that story
about selling his head, which if true I take to be good evidence that this
harpooneer is stark mad, and I’ve no idea of sleeping with a madman; and you,
sir, _you_ I mean, landlord, _you_ , sir, by trying to induce me to do so
knowingly, would thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.”

“Wall,” said the landlord, fetching a long breath, “that’s a purty long sarmon
for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be easy, this here
harpooneer I have been tellin’ you of has just arrived from the south seas,
where he bought up a lot of ’balmed New Zealand heads (great curios, you
know), and he’s sold all on ’em but one, and that one he’s trying to sell to-
night, cause to-morrow’s Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin’ human heads
about the streets when folks is goin’ to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday,
but I stopped him just as he was goin’ out of the door with four heads strung
on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.”

This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showed that
the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me—but at the same time
what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday night clean
into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal business as selling the
heads of dead idolators?

“Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.”

“He pays reg’lar,” was the rejoinder. “But come, it’s getting dreadful late,
you had better be turning flukes—it’s a nice bed; Sal and me slept in that ere
bed the night we were spliced. There’s plenty of room for two to kick about in
that bed; it’s an almighty big bed that. Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to
put our Sam and little Johnny in the foot of it. But I got a dreaming and
sprawling about one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came
near breaking his arm. Arter that, Sal said it wouldn’t do. Come along here,
I’ll give ye a glim in a jiffy;” and so saying he lighted a candle and held it
towards me, offering to lead the way. But I stood irresolute; when looking at
a clock in the corner, he exclaimed “I vum it’s Sunday—you won’t see that
harpooneer to-night; he’s come to anchor somewhere—come along then; _do_ come;
_won’t_ ye come?”

I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a
prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to sleep
abreast.

“There,” said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea chest that
did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; “there, make yourself
comfortable now, and good night to ye.” I turned round from eyeing the bed,
but he had disappeared.

Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of the most
elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. I then glanced round the
room; and besides the bedstead and centre table, could see no other furniture
belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four walls, and a papered
fireboard representing a man striking a whale. Of things not properly
belonging to the room, there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the
floor in one corner; also a large seaman’s bag, containing the harpooneer’s
wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk. Likewise, there was a parcel of
outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall
harpoon standing at the head of the bed.

But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close to the light,
and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at some
satisfactory conclusion concerning it. I can compare it to nothing but a large
door mat, ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something like the
stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in
the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos. But
could it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and
parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise? I put it on,
to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy and
thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneer had
been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit of glass stuck
against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my life. I tore myself out
of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink in the neck.

I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about this head-
peddling harpooneer, and his door mat. After thinking some time on the bed-
side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood in the middle of
the room thinking. I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my
shirt sleeves. But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was,
and remembering what the landlord said about the harpooneer’s not coming home
at all that night, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out
of my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed,
and commended myself to the care of heaven.

Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery, there is
no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not sleep for a long
time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a good
offing towards the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage,
and saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door.

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head-
peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken
to. Holding a light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the
other, the stranger entered the room, and without looking towards the bed,
placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then
began working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as
being in the room. I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted
for some time while employed in unlacing the bag’s mouth. This accomplished,
however, he turned round—when, good heavens! what a sight! Such a face! It was
of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with large
blackish looking squares. Yes, it’s just as I thought, he’s a terrible
bedfellow; he’s been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just from
the surgeon. But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the
light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those
black squares on his cheeks. They were stains of some sort or other. At first
I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to
me. I remembered a story of a white man—a whaleman too—who, falling among the
cannibals, had been tattooed by them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the
course of his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure. And
what is it, thought I, after all! It’s only his outside; a man can be honest
in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his unearthly complexion, that
part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely independent of the
squares of tattooing. To be sure, it might be nothing but a good coat of
tropical tanning; but I never heard of a hot sun’s tanning a white man into a
purplish yellow one. However, I had never been in the South Seas; and perhaps
the sun there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while
all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never
noticed me at all. But, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he
commenced fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a
seal-skin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the old chest in the
middle of the room, he then took the New Zealand head—a ghastly thing
enough—and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his hat—a new beaver
hat—when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise. There was no hair on his
head—none to speak of at least—nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on
his forehead. His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a
mildewed skull. Had not the stranger stood between me and the door, I would
have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner.

Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window, but it was
the second floor back. I am no coward, but what to make of this head-peddling
purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension. Ignorance is the parent of
fear, and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I
confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had
thus broken into my room at the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him
that I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory
answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.

Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his
chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were checkered with the
same squares as his face; his back, too, was all over the same dark squares;
he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years’ War, and just escaped from it with a
sticking-plaster shirt. Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel
of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms. It was now
quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of
a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian country. I
quaked to think of it. A peddler of heads too—perhaps the heads of his own
brothers. He might take a fancy to mine—heavens! look at that tomahawk!

But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about something
that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me that he must indeed
be a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or dreadnaught, which he
had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the pockets, and produced at
length a curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly
the colour of a three days’ old Congo baby. Remembering the embalmed head, at
first I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preserved in
some similar manner. But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it
glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing
but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now the savage goes up to
the empty fire-place, and removing the papered fire-board, sets up this little
hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the andirons. The chimney jambs and
all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made
a very appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.

I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling but ill at
ease meantime—to see what was next to follow. First he takes about a double
handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places them carefully before
the idol; then laying a bit of ship biscuit on top and applying the flame from
the lamp, he kindled the shavings into a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after
many hasty snatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his
fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded
in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he
made a polite offer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not
seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. All these
strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from the
devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan
psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural
manner. At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very
unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if
he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.

All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and seeing him now
exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations, and jumping
into bed with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before the light
was put out, to break the spell in which I had so long been bound.

But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one. Taking
up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for an instant, and
then holding it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed out
great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment the light was extinguished, and
this wild cannibal, tomahawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I
sang out, I could not help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment
he began feeling me.

Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him against the
wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might be, to keep quiet,
and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his guttural responses
satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my meaning.

“Who-e debel you?”—he at last said—“you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.” And so
saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark.

“Landlord, for God’s sake, Peter Coffin!” shouted I. “Landlord! Watch! Coffin!
Angels! save me!”

“Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!” again growled the
cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the hot
tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire. But thank
heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light in hand, and
leaping from the bed I ran up to him.

“Don’t be afraid now,” said he, grinning again, “Queequeg here wouldn’t harm a
hair of your head.”

“Stop your grinning,” shouted I, “and why didn’t you tell me that that
infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?”

“I thought ye know’d it;—didn’t I tell ye, he was a peddlin’ heads around
town?—but turn flukes again and go to sleep. Queequeg, look here—you sabbee
me, I sabbee—you this man sleepe you—you sabbee?”

“Me sabbee plenty”—grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and sitting up
in bed.

“You gettee in,” he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and throwing the
clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a civil but a really kind
and charitable way. I stood looking at him a moment. For all his tattooings he
was on the whole a clean, comely looking cannibal. What’s all this fuss I have
been making about, thought I to myself—the man’s a human being just as I am:
he has just as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better
sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.

“Landlord,” said I, “tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or
whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will turn in
with him. But I don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It’s
dangerous. Besides, I ain’t insured.”

This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely motioned
me to get into bed—rolling over to one side as much as to say—“I won’t touch a
leg of ye.”

“Good night, landlord,” said I, “you may go.”

I turned in, and never slept better in my life.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or
no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I
thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It
is a way I have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp,
drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing
before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet;
and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it
requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping
into the street, and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account
it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol
and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I
quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they but
knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very
nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by wharves as
Indian isles by coral reefs—commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and
left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme downtown is the battery,
where that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled by breezes, which a few
hours previous were out of sight of land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers
there.

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from Corlears Hook
to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you
see?—Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon
thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the
spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of
ships from China; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a
still better seaward peep. But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in
lath and plaster—tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How
then is this? Are the green fields gone? What do they here?

But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly
bound for a dive. Strange! Nothing will content them but the extremest limit
of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not
suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without
falling in. And there they stand—miles of them—leagues. Inlanders all, they
come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues—north, east, south, and west.
Yet here they all unite. Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of
the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?

Once more. Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. Take almost
any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves
you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. Let the most absent-
minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries—stand that man on his legs,
set his feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there
be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst in the great American
desert, try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a
metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are
wedded for ever.

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
Saco. What is the chief element he employs? There stand his trees, each with a
hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and here sleeps his
meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping
spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue. But though the picture lies
thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon
this shepherd’s head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd’s eye were fixed
upon the magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, when for
scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies—what is the
one charm wanting?—Water—there is not a drop of water there! Were Niagara but
a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it? Why did
the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver,
deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or invest his
money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach? Why is almost every robust
healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to
go to sea? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel
such a mystical vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out
of sight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why did the
Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely all this is
not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus,
who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image he saw in the
fountain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that same image, we ourselves
see in all rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of
life; and this is the key to it all.

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to
grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not
mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to go as a
passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless you
have something in it. Besides, passengers get sea-sick—grow quarrelsome—don’t
sleep of nights—do not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;—no, I never
go as a passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea
as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I abominate all honorable
respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind whatsoever. It is
quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking care of
ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not. And as for going as
cook,—though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a
sort of officer on ship-board—yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling
fowls;—though once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and
peppered, there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to say
reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous
dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that
you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast, plumb
down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head. True, they
rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, like a
grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant
enough. It touches one’s sense of honor, particularly if you come of an old
established family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or
Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just previous to putting your hand into
the tar-pot, you have been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the
tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and
the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off in time.

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and
sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in
the scales of the New Testament? Do you think the archangel Gabriel thinks
anything the less of me, because I promptly and respectfully obey that old
hunks in that particular instance? Who ain’t a slave? Tell me that. Well,
then, however the old sea-captains may order me about—however they may thump
and punch me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;
that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way—either in
a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump
is passed round, and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blades, and be
content.

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of paying me
for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever
heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And there is all
the difference in the world between paying and being paid. The act of paying
is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves
entailed upon us. But _being paid_ ,—what will compare with it? The urbane
activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering
that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and
that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we
consign ourselves to perdition!

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome exercise and
pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world, head winds are far
more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate the
Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck
gets his atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He
thinks he breathes it first; but not so. In much the same way do the
commonalty lead their leaders in many other things, at the same time that the
leaders little suspect it. But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly
smelt the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on
a whaling voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some
unaccountable way—he can better answer than any one else. And, doubtless, my
going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence
that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in as a sort of brief interlude and
solo between more extensive performances. I take it that this part of the bill
must have run something like this:

“ _Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States._ “WHALING
VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the Fates,
put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when others were set
down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy parts in
genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces—though I cannot tell why this was
exactly; yet, now that I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a
little into the springs and motives which being cunningly presented to me
under various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,
besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my
own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
himself. Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity.
Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk; the
undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all the attending
marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my
wish. With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements;
but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. I
love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what
is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with
it—would they let me—since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the
inmates of the place one lodges in.

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that
swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost soul,
endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them all, one grand hooded
phantom, like a snow hill in the air.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag.

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and
started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto,
I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was a Saturday night in December. Much was I
disappointed upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already
sailed, and that no way of reaching that place would offer, till the following
Monday.

As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at this
same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well be related
that I, for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was made up to sail in
no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a fine, boisterous
something about everything connected with that famous old island, which
amazingly pleased me. Besides though New Bedford has of late been gradually
monopolising the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old
Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original—the
Tyre of this Carthage;—the place where the first dead American whale was
stranded. Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the
Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan? And where
but from Nantucket, too, did that first adventurous little sloop put forth,
partly laden with imported cobblestones—so goes the story—to throw at the
whales, in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from
the bowsprit?

Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me in New
Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a matter of
concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a very dubious-
looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless. I
knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and
only brought up a few pieces of silver,—So, wherever you go, Ishmael, said I
to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag, and
comparing the gloom towards the north with the darkness towards the
south—wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear
Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price, and don’t be too particular.

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of “The Crossed
Harpoons”—but it looked too expensive and jolly there. Further on, from the
bright red windows of the “Sword-Fish Inn,” there came such fervent rays, that
it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from before the house, for
everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic
pavement,—rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against the flinty
projections, because from hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were
in a most miserable plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing
one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of the
tinkling glasses within. But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don’t you hear?
get away from before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way. So on
I went. I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward, for
there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.

Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand, and here
and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At this hour of the
night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of the town proved all but
deserted. But presently I came to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide
building, the door of which stood invitingly open. It had a careless look, as
if it were meant for the uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I
did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the
flying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city,
Gomorrah? But “The Crossed Harpoons,” and “The Sword-Fish?”—this, then must
needs be the sign of “The Trap.” However, I picked myself up and hearing a
loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door.

It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred black faces
turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was
beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church; and the preacher’s text was
about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and teeth-
gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment
at the sign of ‘The Trap!’

Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks, and
heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a swinging sign over
the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representing a tall straight
jet of misty spray, and these words underneath—“The Spouter Inn:—Peter
Coffin.”

Coffin?—Spouter?—Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought I. But
it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this Peter here is
an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and the place, for the
time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated little wooden house itself
looked as if it might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt
district, and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it,
I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea
coffee.

It was a queer sort of place—a gable-ended old house, one side palsied as it
were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that
tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about
poor Paul’s tossed craft. Euroclydon, nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant
zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.
“In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,” says an old writer—of
whose works I possess the only copy extant—“it maketh a marvellous difference,
whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on
the outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where the
frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only glazier.”
True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my mind—old black-letter,
thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the
house. What a pity they didn’t stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and
thrust in a little lint here and there. But it’s too late to make any
improvements now. The universe is finished; the copestone is on, and the chips
were carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth
against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his
shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his
mouth, and yet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon!
says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper—(he had a redder one afterwards)
pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty night; how Orion glitters; what northern
lights! Let them talk of their oriental summer climes of everlasting
conservatories; give me the privilege of making my own summer with my own
coals.

But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up to the
grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here? Would
he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the line of the equator; yea,
ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost?

Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the door
of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be moored to one
of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar in an ice palace
made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a temperance society, he only
drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there is
plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet, and
see what sort of a place this “Spouter” may be.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide, low,
straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks
of some condemned old craft. On one side hung a very large oilpainting so
thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the unequal crosslights by
which you viewed it, it was only by diligent study and a series of systematic
visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way
arrive at an understanding of its purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades
and shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in
the time of the New England hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched.
But by dint of much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings,
and especially by throwing open the little window towards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild,
might not be altogether unwarranted.

But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous, black
mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over three blue, dim,
perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy
picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted. Yet was there a sort
of indefinite, half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly
froze you to it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out
what that marvellous painting meant. Ever and anon a bright, but, alas,
deceptive idea would dart you through.—It’s the Black Sea in a midnight
gale.—It’s the unnatural combat of the four primal elements.—It’s a blasted
heath.—It’s a Hyperborean winter scene.—It’s the breaking-up of the icebound
stream of Time. But at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous
something in the picture’s midst. _That_ once found out, and all the rest were
plain. But stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish? even
the great leviathan himself?

In fact, the artist’s design seemed this: a final theory of my own, partly
based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whom I conversed
upon the subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner in a great hurricane;
the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three dismantled masts alone
visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft,
is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.

The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish array of
monstrous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with glittering teeth
resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of human hair; and one
was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round like the segment made in
the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and
wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-
harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying implement. Mixed with these were
rusty old whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed. Some were
storied weapons. With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years
ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And
that harpoon—so like a corkscrew now—was flung in Javan seas, and run away
with by a whale, years afterwards slain off the Cape of Blanco. The original
iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body
of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the
hump.

Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way—cut through what
in old times must have been a great central chimney with fireplaces all
round—you enter the public room. A still duskier place is this, with such low
ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you would
almost fancy you trod some old craft’s cockpits, especially of such a howling
night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously. On one side
stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled
with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world’s remotest nooks. Projecting
from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den—the bar—a rude
attempt at a right whale’s head. Be that how it may, there stands the vast
arched bone of the whale’s jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive beneath
it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters, bottles,
flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by
which name indeed they called him), bustles a little withered old man, who,
for their money, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.

Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. Though true
cylinders without—within, the villanous green goggling glasses deceitfully
tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians rudely pecked into
the glass, surround these footpads’ goblets. Fill to _this_ mark, and your
charge is but a penny; to _this_ a penny more; and so on to the full glass—the
Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling.

Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about a
table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of _skrimshander_. I sought
the landlord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with a room,
received for answer that his house was full—not a bed unoccupied. “But avast,”
he added, tapping his forehead, “you haint no objections to sharing a
harpooneer’s blanket, have ye? I s’pose you are goin’ a-whalin’, so you’d
better get used to that sort of thing.”

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should ever do
so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that if he (the
landlord) really had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not
decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander further about a strange town
on so bitter a night, I would put up with the half of any decent man’s
blanket.

“I thought so. All right; take a seat. Supper?—you want supper? Supper’ll be
ready directly.”

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
Battery. At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with his
jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space between his
legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but he didn’t make
much headway, I thought.

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an adjoining
room. It was cold as Iceland—no fire at all—the landlord said he couldn’t
afford it. Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet. We
were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and hold to our lips cups of
scalding tea with our half frozen fingers. But the fare was of the most
substantial kind—not only meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens!
dumplings for supper! One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself
to these dumplings in a most direful manner.

“My boy,” said the landlord, “you’ll have the nightmare to a dead sartainty.”

“Landlord,” I whispered, “that aint the harpooneer is it?”

“Oh, no,” said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, “the harpooneer is a
dark complexioned chap. He never eats dumplings, he don’t—he eats nothing but
steaks, and he likes ’em rare.”

“The devil he does,” says I. “Where is that harpooneer? Is he here?”

“He’ll be here afore long,” was the answer.

I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this “dark
complexioned” harpooneer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so turned
out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into bed before I
did.

Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not what
else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the evening as a
looker on.

Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting up, the landlord cried,
“That’s the Grampus’s crew. I seed her reported in the offing this morning; a
three years’ voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys; now we’ll have the latest
news from the Feegees.”

A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung open, and
in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. Enveloped in their shaggy watch
coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, all bedarned and
ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears
from Labrador. They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first
house they entered. No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the
whale’s mouth—the bar—when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating,
soon poured them out brimmers all round. One complained of a bad cold in his
head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses,
which he swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever,
never mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador,
or on the weather side of an ice-island.

The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even with the
arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began capering about most
obstreperously.

I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though he
seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober
face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much noise as the rest.
This man interested me at once; and since the sea-gods had ordained that he
should soon become my shipmate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as
this narrative is concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of
him. He stood full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like
a coffer-dam. I have seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply
brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in the
deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to give
him much joy. His voice at once announced that he was a Southerner, and from
his fine stature, I thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from the
Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia. When the revelry of his companions had mounted
to its height, this man slipped away unobserved, and I saw no more of him till
he became my comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was missed by
his shipmates, and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with
them, they raised a cry of “Bulkington! Bulkington! where’s Bulkington?” and
darted out of the house in pursuit of him.

It was now about nine o’clock, and the room seeming almost supernaturally
quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate myself upon a little plan
that had occurred to me just previous to the entrance of the seamen.

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal rather
not sleep with your own brother. I don’t know how it is, but people like to be
private when they are sleeping. And when it comes to sleeping with an unknown
stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger a harpooneer,
then your objections indefinitely multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason
why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for
sailors no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore. To
be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own
hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.

The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the thought of
sleeping with him. It was fair to presume that being a harpooneer, his linen
or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the tidiest, certainly none
of the finest. I began to twitch all over. Besides, it was getting late, and
my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going bedwards. Suppose now, he
should tumble in upon me at midnight—how could I tell from what vile hole he
had been coming?

“Landlord! I’ve changed my mind about that harpooneer.—I shan’t sleep with
him. I’ll try the bench here.”

“Just as you please; I’m sorry I can’t spare ye a tablecloth for a mattress,
and it’s a plaguy rough board here”—feeling of the knots and notches. “But
wait a bit, Skrimshander; I’ve got a carpenter’s plane there in the bar—wait,
I say, and I’ll make ye snug enough.” So saying he procured the plane; and
with his old silk handkerchief first dusting the bench, vigorously set to
planing away at my bed, the while grinning like an ape. The shavings flew
right and left; till at last the plane-iron came bump against an
indestructible knot. The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him
for heaven’s sake to quit—the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not
know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank.
So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them into the
great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business, and left me
in a brown study.

I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too short;
but that could be mended with a chair. But it was a foot too narrow, and the
other bench in the room was about four inches higher than the planed one—so
there was no yoking them. I then placed the first bench lengthwise along the
only clear space against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my
back to settle down in. But I soon found that there came such a draught of
cold air over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never
do at all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one
from the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the
immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the night.

The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn’t I steal a march
on him—bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the
most violent knockings? It seemed no bad idea; but upon second thoughts I
dismissed it. For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I
popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all
ready to knock me down!

Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of spending a
sufferable night unless in some other person’s bed, I began to think that
after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown
harpooneer. Thinks I, I’ll wait awhile; he must be dropping in before long.
I’ll have a good look at him then, and perhaps we may become jolly good
bedfellows after all—there’s no telling.

But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes, and
going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.

“Landlord!” said I, “what sort of a chap is he—does he always keep such late
hours?” It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.

The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be mightily
tickled at something beyond my comprehension. “No,” he answered, “generally
he’s an early bird—airley to bed and airley to rise—yes, he’s the bird what
catches the worm. But to-night he went out a peddling, you see, and I don’t
see what on airth keeps him so late, unless, may be, he can’t sell his head.”

“Can’t sell his head?—What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are
telling me?” getting into a towering rage. “Do you pretend to say, landlord,
that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed Saturday night, or
rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around this town?”

“That’s precisely it,” said the landlord, “and I told him he couldn’t sell it
here, the market’s overstocked.”

“With what?” shouted I.

“With heads to be sure; ain’t there too many heads in the world?”

“I tell you what it is, landlord,” said I quite calmly, “you’d better stop
spinning that yarn to me—I’m not green.”

“May be not,” taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, “but I rayther
guess you’ll be done _brown_ if that ere harpooneer hears you a slanderin’ his
head.”

“I’ll break it for him,” said I, now flying into a passion again at this
unaccountable farrago of the landlord’s.

“It’s broke a’ready,” said he.

“Broke,” said I—“ _broke_ , do you mean?”

“Sartain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, I guess.”

“Landlord,” said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a snow-
storm—“landlord, stop whittling. You and I must understand one another, and
that too without delay. I come to your house and want a bed; you tell me you
can only give me half a one; that the other half belongs to a certain
harpooneer. And about this harpooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist
in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories tending to beget in
me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow—a
sort of connexion, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the
highest degree. I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the night
with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay that story
about selling his head, which if true I take to be good evidence that this
harpooneer is stark mad, and I’ve no idea of sleeping with a madman; and you,
sir, _you_ I mean, landlord, _you_ , sir, by trying to induce me to do so
knowingly, would thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.”

“Wall,” said the landlord, fetching a long breath, “that’s a purty long sarmon
for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be easy, this here
harpooneer I have been tellin’ you of has just arrived from the south seas,
where he bought up a lot of ’balmed New Zealand heads (great curios, you
know), and he’s sold all on ’em but one, and that one he’s trying to sell to-
night, cause to-morrow’s Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin’ human heads
about the streets when folks is goin’ to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday,
but I stopped him just as he was goin’ out of the door with four heads strung
on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.”

This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showed that
the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me—but at the same time
what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday night clean
into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal business as selling the
heads of dead idolators?

“Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.”

“He pays reg’lar,” was the rejoinder. “But come, it’s getting dreadful late,
you had better be turning flukes—it’s a nice bed; Sal and me slept in that ere
bed the night we were spliced. There’s plenty of room for two to kick about in
that bed; it’s an almighty big bed that. Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to
put our Sam and little Johnny in the foot of it. But I got a dreaming and
sprawling about one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came
near breaking his arm. Arter that, Sal said it wouldn’t do. Come along here,
I’ll give ye a glim in a jiffy;” and so saying he lighted a candle and held it
towards me, offering to lead the way. But I stood irresolute; when looking at
a clock in the corner, he exclaimed “I vum it’s Sunday—you won’t see that
harpooneer to-night; he’s come to anchor somewhere—come along then; _do_ come;
_won’t_ ye come?”

I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a
prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to sleep
abreast.

“There,” said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea chest that
did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; “there, make yourself
comfortable now, and good night to ye.” I turned round from eyeing the bed,
but he had disappeared.

Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of the most
elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. I then glanced round the
room; and besides the bedstead and centre table, could see no other furniture
belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four walls, and a papered
fireboard representing a man striking a whale. Of things not properly
belonging to the room, there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the
floor in one corner; also a large seaman’s bag, containing the harpooneer’s
wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk. Likewise, there was a parcel of
outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall
harpoon standing at the head of the bed.

But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close to the light,
and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at some
satisfactory conclusion concerning it. I can compare it to nothing but a large
door mat, ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something like the
stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in
the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos. But
could it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and
parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise? I put it on,
to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy and
thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneer had
been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit of glass stuck
against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my life. I tore myself out
of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink in the neck.

I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about this head-
peddling harpooneer, and his door mat. After thinking some time on the bed-
side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood in the middle of
the room thinking. I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my
shirt sleeves. But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was,
and remembering what the landlord said about the harpooneer’s not coming home
at all that night, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out
of my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed,
and commended myself to the care of heaven.

Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery, there is
no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not sleep for a long
time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a good
offing towards the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage,
and saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door.

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head-
peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken
to. Holding a light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the
other, the stranger entered the room, and without looking towards the bed,
placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then
began working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as
being in the room. I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted
for some time while employed in unlacing the bag’s mouth. This accomplished,
however, he turned round—when, good heavens! what a sight! Such a face! It was
of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with large
blackish looking squares. Yes, it’s just as I thought, he’s a terrible
bedfellow; he’s been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just from
the surgeon. But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the
light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those
black squares on his cheeks. They were stains of some sort or other. At first
I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to
me. I remembered a story of a white man—a whaleman too—who, falling among the
cannibals, had been tattooed by them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the
course of his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure. And
what is it, thought I, after all! It’s only his outside; a man can be honest
in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his unearthly complexion, that
part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely independent of the
squares of tattooing. To be sure, it might be nothing but a good coat of
tropical tanning; but I never heard of a hot sun’s tanning a white man into a
purplish yellow one. However, I had never been in the South Seas; and perhaps
the sun there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while
all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never
noticed me at all. But, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he
commenced fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a
seal-skin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the old chest in the
middle of the room, he then took the New Zealand head—a ghastly thing
enough—and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his hat—a new beaver
hat—when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise. There was no hair on his
head—none to speak of at least—nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on
his forehead. His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a
mildewed skull. Had not the stranger stood between me and the door, I would
have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner.

Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window, but it was
the second floor back. I am no coward, but what to make of this head-peddling
purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension. Ignorance is the parent of
fear, and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I
confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had
thus broken into my room at the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him
that I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory
answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.

Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his
chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were checkered with the
same squares as his face; his back, too, was all over the same dark squares;
he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years’ War, and just escaped from it with a
sticking-plaster shirt. Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel
of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms. It was now
quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of
a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian country. I
quaked to think of it. A peddler of heads too—perhaps the heads of his own
brothers. He might take a fancy to mine—heavens! look at that tomahawk!

But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about something
that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me that he must indeed
be a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or dreadnaught, which he
had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the pockets, and produced at
length a curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly
the colour of a three days’ old Congo baby. Remembering the embalmed head, at
first I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preserved in
some similar manner. But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it
glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing
but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now the savage goes up to
the empty fire-place, and removing the papered fire-board, sets up this little
hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the andirons. The chimney jambs and
all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made
a very appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.

I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling but ill at
ease meantime—to see what was next to follow. First he takes about a double
handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places them carefully before
the idol; then laying a bit of ship biscuit on top and applying the flame from
the lamp, he kindled the shavings into a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after
many hasty snatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his
fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded
in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he
made a polite offer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not
seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. All these
strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from the
devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan
psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural
manner. At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very
unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if
he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.

All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and seeing him now
exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations, and jumping
into bed with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before the light
was put out, to break the spell in which I had so long been bound.

But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one. Taking
up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for an instant, and
then holding it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed out
great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment the light was extinguished, and
this wild cannibal, tomahawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I
sang out, I could not help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment
he began feeling me.

Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him against the
wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might be, to keep quiet,
and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his guttural responses
satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my meaning.

“Who-e debel you?”—he at last said—“you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.” And so
saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark.

“Landlord, for God’s sake, Peter Coffin!” shouted I. “Landlord! Watch! Coffin!
Angels! save me!”

“Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!” again growled the
cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the hot
tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire. But thank
heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light in hand, and
leaping from the bed I ran up to him.

“Don’t be afraid now,” said he, grinning again, “Queequeg here wouldn’t harm a
hair of your head.”

“Stop your grinning,” shouted I, “and why didn’t you tell me that that
infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?”

“I thought ye know’d it;—didn’t I tell ye, he was a peddlin’ heads around
town?—but turn flukes again and go to sleep. Queequeg, look here—you sabbee
me, I sabbee—you this man sleepe you—you sabbee?”

“Me sabbee plenty”—grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and sitting up
in bed.

“You gettee in,” he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and throwing the
clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a civil but a really kind
and charitable way. I stood looking at him a moment. For all his tattooings he
was on the whole a clean, comely looking cannibal. What’s all this fuss I have
been making about, thought I to myself—the man’s a human being just as I am:
he has just as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better
sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.

“Landlord,” said I, “tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or
whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will turn in
with him. But I don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It’s
dangerous. Besides, I ain’t insured.”

This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely motioned
me to get into bed—rolling over to one side as much as to say—“I won’t touch a
leg of ye.”

“Good night, landlord,” said I, “you may go.”

I turned in, and never slept better in my life.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or
no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I
thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It
is a way I have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp,
drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing
before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet;
and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it
requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping
into the street, and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account
it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol
and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I
quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they but
knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish very
nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by wharves as
Indian isles by coral reefs—commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and
left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme downtown is the battery,
where that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled by breezes, which a few
hours previous were out of sight of land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers
there.

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from Corlears Hook
to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you
see?—Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand thousands upon
thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the
spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of
ships from China; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a
still better seaward peep. But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in
lath and plaster—tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How
then is this? Are the green fields gone? What do they here?

But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly
bound for a dive. Strange! Nothing will content them but the extremest limit
of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not
suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without
falling in. And there they stand—miles of them—leagues. Inlanders all, they
come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues—north, east, south, and west.
Yet here they all unite. Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of
the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?

Once more. Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. Take almost
any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves
you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. Let the most absent-
minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries—stand that man on his legs,
set his feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there
be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst in the great American
desert, try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a
metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are
wedded for ever.

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
Saco. What is the chief element he employs? There stand his trees, each with a
hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and here sleeps his
meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping
spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue. But though the picture lies
thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon
this shepherd’s head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd’s eye were fixed
upon the magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, when for
scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies—what is the
one charm wanting?—Water—there is not a drop of water there! Were Niagara but
a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it? Why did
the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver,
deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or invest his
money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach? Why is almost every robust
healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to
go to sea? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel
such a mystical vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out
of sight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why did the
Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely all this is
not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus,
who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image he saw in the
fountain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that same image, we ourselves
see in all rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of
life; and this is the key to it all.

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to
grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not
mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to go as a
passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless you
have something in it. Besides, passengers get sea-sick—grow quarrelsome—don’t
sleep of nights—do not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;—no, I never
go as a passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea
as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I abominate all honorable
respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind whatsoever. It is
quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking care of
ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not. And as for going as
cook,—though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a
sort of officer on ship-board—yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling
fowls;—though once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and
peppered, there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to say
reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous
dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that
you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast, plumb
down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head. True, they
rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, like a
grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant
enough. It touches one’s sense of honor, particularly if you come of an old
established family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or
Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just previous to putting your hand into
the tar-pot, you have been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the
tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and
the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off in time.

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and
sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in
the scales of the New Testament? Do you think the archangel Gabriel thinks
anything the less of me, because I promptly and respectfully obey that old
hunks in that particular instance? Who ain’t a slave? Tell me that. Well,
then, however the old sea-captains may order me about—however they may thump
and punch me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;
that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way—either in
a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump
is passed round, and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blades, and be
content.

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of paying me
for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever
heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And there is all
the difference in the world between paying and being paid. The act of paying
is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves
entailed upon us. But _being paid_ ,—what will compare with it? The urbane
activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering
that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and
that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we
consign ourselves to perdition!

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome exercise and
pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world, head winds are far
more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate the
Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck
gets his atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He
thinks he breathes it first; but not so. In much the same way do the
commonalty lead their leaders in many other things, at the same time that the
leaders little suspect it. But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly
smelt the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on
a whaling voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some
unaccountable way—he can better answer than any one else. And, doubtless, my
going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence
that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in as a sort of brief interlude and
solo between more extensive performances. I take it that this part of the bill
must have run something like this:

“ _Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States._ “WHALING
VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the Fates,
put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when others were set
down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy parts in
genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces—though I cannot tell why this was
exactly; yet, now that I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a
little into the springs and motives which being cunningly presented to me
under various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,
besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my
own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
himself. Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity.
Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk; the
undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all the attending
marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my
wish. With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements;
but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. I
love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what
is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with
it—would they let me—since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the
inmates of the place one lodges in.

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that
swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost soul,
endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them all, one grand hooded
phantom, like a snow hill in the air.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag.

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and
started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto,
I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was a Saturday night in December. Much was I
disappointed upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already
sailed, and that no way of reaching that place would offer, till the following
Monday.

As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at this
same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well be related
that I, for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was made up to sail in
no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a fine, boisterous
something about everything connected with that famous old island, which
amazingly pleased me. Besides though New Bedford has of late been gradually
monopolising the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old
Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original—the
Tyre of this Carthage;—the place where the first dead American whale was
stranded. Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the
Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan? And where
but from Nantucket, too, did that first adventurous little sloop put forth,
partly laden with imported cobblestones—so goes the story—to throw at the
whales, in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from
the bowsprit?

Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me in New
Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a matter of
concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a very dubious-
looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless. I
knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and
only brought up a few pieces of silver,—So, wherever you go, Ishmael, said I
to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag, and
comparing the gloom towards the north with the darkness towards the
south—wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear
Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price, and don’t be too particular.

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of “The Crossed
Harpoons”—but it looked too expensive and jolly there. Further on, from the
bright red windows of the “Sword-Fish Inn,” there came such fervent rays, that
it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from before the house, for
everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic
pavement,—rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against the flinty
projections, because from hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were
in a most miserable plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing
one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of the
tinkling glasses within. But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don’t you hear?
get away from before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way. So on
I went. I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward, for
there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.

Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand, and here
and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At this hour of the
night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of the town proved all but
deserted. But presently I came to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide
building, the door of which stood invitingly open. It had a careless look, as
if it were meant for the uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I
did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the
flying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city,
Gomorrah? But “The Crossed Harpoons,” and “The Sword-Fish?”—this, then must
needs be the sign of “The Trap.” However, I picked myself up and hearing a
loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door.

It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred black faces
turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was
beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church; and the preacher’s text was
about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and teeth-
gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment
at the sign of ‘The Trap!’

Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks, and
heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a swinging sign over
the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representing a tall straight
jet of misty spray, and these words underneath—“The Spouter Inn:—Peter
Coffin.”

Coffin?—Spouter?—Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought I. But
it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this Peter here is
an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and the place, for the
time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated little wooden house itself
looked as if it might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt
district, and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it,
I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea
coffee.

It was a queer sort of place—a gable-ended old house, one side palsied as it
were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that
tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about
poor Paul’s tossed craft. Euroclydon, nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant
zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.
“In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,” says an old writer—of
whose works I possess the only copy extant—“it maketh a marvellous difference,
whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on
the outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where the
frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only glazier.”
True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my mind—old black-letter,
thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the
house. What a pity they didn’t stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and
thrust in a little lint here and there. But it’s too late to make any
improvements now. The universe is finished; the copestone is on, and the chips
were carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth
against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his
shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his
mouth, and yet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon!
says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper—(he had a redder one afterwards)
pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty night; how Orion glitters; what northern
lights! Let them talk of their oriental summer climes of everlasting
conservatories; give me the privilege of making my own summer with my own
coals.

But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up to the
grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here? Would
he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the line of the equator; yea,
ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost?

Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the door
of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be moored to one
of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar in an ice palace
made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a temperance society, he only
drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there is
plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet, and
see what sort of a place this “Spouter” may be.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide, low,
straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks
of some condemned old craft. On one side hung a very large oilpainting so
thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the unequal crosslights by
which you viewed it, it was only by diligent study and a series of systematic
visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way
arrive at an understanding of its purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades
and shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in
the time of the New England hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched.
But by dint of much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings,
and especially by throwing open the little window towards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild,
might not be altogether unwarranted.

But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous, black
mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over three blue, dim,
perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy
picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted. Yet was there a sort
of indefinite, half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly
froze you to it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out
what that marvellous painting meant. Ever and anon a bright, but, alas,
deceptive idea would dart you through.—It’s the Black Sea in a midnight
gale.—It’s the unnatural combat of the four primal elements.—It’s a blasted
heath.—It’s a Hyperborean winter scene.—It’s the breaking-up of the icebound
stream of Time. But at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous
something in the picture’s midst. _That_ once found out, and all the rest were
plain. But stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish? even
the great leviathan himself?

In fact, the artist’s design seemed this: a final theory of my own, partly
based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whom I conversed
upon the subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner in a great hurricane;
the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three dismantled masts alone
visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft,
is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.

The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish array of
monstrous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with glittering teeth
resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of human hair; and one
was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round like the segment made in
the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and
wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-
harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying implement. Mixed with these were
rusty old whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed. Some were
storied weapons. With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years
ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And
that harpoon—so like a corkscrew now—was flung in Javan seas, and run away
with by a whale, years afterwards slain off the Cape of Blanco. The original
iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body
of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the
hump.

Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way—cut through what
in old times must have been a great central chimney with fireplaces all
round—you enter the public room. A still duskier place is this, with such low
ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you would
almost fancy you trod some old craft’s cockpits, especially of such a howling
night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously. On one side
stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled
with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world’s remotest nooks. Projecting
from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den—the bar—a rude
attempt at a right whale’s head. Be that how it may, there stands the vast
arched bone of the whale’s jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive beneath
it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters, bottles,
flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by
which name indeed they called him), bustles a little withered old man, who,
for their money, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.

Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. Though true
cylinders without—within, the villanous green goggling glasses deceitfully
tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians rudely pecked into
the glass, surround these footpads’ goblets. Fill to _this_ mark, and your
charge is but a penny; to _this_ a penny more; and so on to the full glass—the
Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling.

Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about a
table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of _skrimshander_. I sought
the landlord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with a room,
received for answer that his house was full—not a bed unoccupied. “But avast,”
he added, tapping his forehead, “you haint no objections to sharing a
harpooneer’s blanket, have ye? I s’pose you are goin’ a-whalin’, so you’d
better get used to that sort of thing.”

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should ever do
so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that if he (the
landlord) really had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not
decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander further about a strange town
on so bitter a night, I would put up with the half of any decent man’s
blanket.

“I thought so. All right; take a seat. Supper?—you want supper? Supper’ll be
ready directly.”

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
Battery. At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with his
jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space between his
legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but he didn’t make
much headway, I thought.

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an adjoining
room. It was cold as Iceland—no fire at all—the landlord said he couldn’t
afford it. Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet. We
were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and hold to our lips cups of
scalding tea with our half frozen fingers. But the fare was of the most
substantial kind—not only meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens!
dumplings for supper! One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself
to these dumplings in a most direful manner.

“My boy,” said the landlord, “you’ll have the nightmare to a dead sartainty.”

“Landlord,” I whispered, “that aint the harpooneer is it?”

“Oh, no,” said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, “the harpooneer is a
dark complexioned chap. He never eats dumplings, he don’t—he eats nothing but
steaks, and he likes ’em rare.”

“The devil he does,” says I. “Where is that harpooneer? Is he here?”

“He’ll be here afore long,” was the answer.

I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this “dark
complexioned” harpooneer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so turned
out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into bed before I
did.

Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not what
else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the evening as a
looker on.

Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting up, the landlord cried,
“That’s the Grampus’s crew. I seed her reported in the offing this morning; a
three years’ voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys; now we’ll have the latest
news from the Feegees.”

A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung open, and
in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. Enveloped in their shaggy watch
coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, all bedarned and
ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears
from Labrador. They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first
house they entered. No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the
whale’s mouth—the bar—when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating,
soon poured them out brimmers all round. One complained of a bad cold in his
head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses,
which he swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever,
never mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador,
or on the weather side of an ice-island.

The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even with the
arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began capering about most
obstreperously.

I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though he
seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober
face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much noise as the rest.
This man interested me at once; and since the sea-gods had ordained that he
should soon become my shipmate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as
this narrative is concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of
him. He stood full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like
a coffer-dam. I have seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply
brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in the
deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to give
him much joy. His voice at once announced that he was a Southerner, and from
his fine stature, I thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from the
Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia. When the revelry of his companions had mounted
to its height, this man slipped away unobserved, and I saw no more of him till
he became my comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was missed by
his shipmates, and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with
them, they raised a cry of “Bulkington! Bulkington! where’s Bulkington?” and
darted out of the house in pursuit of him.

It was now about nine o’clock, and the room seeming almost supernaturally
quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate myself upon a little plan
that had occurred to me just previous to the entrance of the seamen.

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal rather
not sleep with your own brother. I don’t know how it is, but people like to be
private when they are sleeping. And when it comes to sleeping with an unknown
stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger a harpooneer,
then your objections indefinitely multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason
why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for
sailors no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore. To
be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own
hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.

The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the thought of
sleeping with him. It was fair to presume that being a harpooneer, his linen
or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the tidiest, certainly none
of the finest. I began to twitch all over. Besides, it was getting late, and
my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going bedwards. Suppose now, he
should tumble in upon me at midnight—how could I tell from what vile hole he
had been coming?

“Landlord! I’ve changed my mind about that harpooneer.—I shan’t sleep with
him. I’ll try the bench here.”

“Just as you please; I’m sorry I can’t spare ye a tablecloth for a mattress,
and it’s a plaguy rough board here”—feeling of the knots and notches. “But
wait a bit, Skrimshander; I’ve got a carpenter’s plane there in the bar—wait,
I say, and I’ll make ye snug enough.” So saying he procured the plane; and
with his old silk handkerchief first dusting the bench, vigorously set to
planing away at my bed, the while grinning like an ape. The shavings flew
right and left; till at last the plane-iron came bump against an
indestructible knot. The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him
for heaven’s sake to quit—the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not
know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank.
So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them into the
great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business, and left me
in a brown study.

I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too short;
but that could be mended with a chair. But it was a foot too narrow, and the
other bench in the room was about four inches higher than the planed one—so
there was no yoking them. I then placed the first bench lengthwise along the
only clear space against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my
back to settle down in. But I soon found that there came such a draught of
cold air over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never
do at all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one
from the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the
immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the night.

The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn’t I steal a march
on him—bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the
most violent knockings? It seemed no bad idea; but upon second thoughts I
dismissed it. For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I
popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all
ready to knock me down!

Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of spending a
sufferable night unless in some other person’s bed, I began to think that
after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown
harpooneer. Thinks I, I’ll wait awhile; he must be dropping in before long.
I’ll have a good look at him then, and perhaps we may become jolly good
bedfellows after all—there’s no telling.

But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes, and
going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.

“Landlord!” said I, “what sort of a chap is he—does he always keep such late
hours?” It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.

The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be mightily
tickled at something beyond my comprehension. “No,” he answered, “generally
he’s an early bird—airley to bed and airley to rise—yes, he’s the bird what
catches the worm. But to-night he went out a peddling, you see, and I don’t
see what on airth keeps him so late, unless, may be, he can’t sell his head.”

“Can’t sell his head?—What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are
telling me?” getting into a towering rage. “Do you pretend to say, landlord,
that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed Saturday night, or
rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around this town?”

“That’s precisely it,” said the landlord, “and I told him he couldn’t sell it
here, the market’s overstocked.”

“With what?” shouted I.

“With heads to be sure; ain’t there too many heads in the world?”

“I tell you what it is, landlord,” said I quite calmly, “you’d better stop
spinning that yarn to me—I’m not green.”

“May be not,” taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, “but I rayther
guess you’ll be done _brown_ if that ere harpooneer hears you a slanderin’ his
head.”

“I’ll break it for him,” said I, now flying into a passion again at this
unaccountable farrago of the landlord’s.

“It’s broke a’ready,” said he.

“Broke,” said I—“ _broke_ , do you mean?”

“Sartain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, I guess.”

“Landlord,” said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a snow-
storm—“landlord, stop whittling. You and I must understand one another, and
that too without delay. I come to your house and want a bed; you tell me you
can only give me half a one; that the other half belongs to a certain
harpooneer. And about this harpooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist
in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories tending to beget in
me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow—a
sort of connexion, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the
highest degree. I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the night
with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay that story
about selling his head, which if true I take to be good evidence that this
harpooneer is stark mad, and I’ve no idea of sleeping with a madman; and you,
sir, _you_ I mean, landlord, _you_ , sir, by trying to induce me to do so
knowingly, would thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.”

“Wall,” said the landlord, fetching a long breath, “that’s a purty long sarmon
for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be easy, this here
harpooneer I have been tellin’ you of has just arrived from the south seas,
where he bought up a lot of ’balmed New Zealand heads (great curios, you
know), and he’s sold all on ’em but one, and that one he’s trying to sell to-
night, cause to-morrow’s Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin’ human heads
about the streets when folks is goin’ to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday,
but I stopped him just as he was goin’ out of the door with four heads strung
on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.”

This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showed that
the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me—but at the same time
what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday night clean
into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal business as selling the
heads of dead idolators?

“Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.”

“He pays reg’lar,” was the rejoinder. “But come, it’s getting dreadful late,
you had better be turning flukes—it’s a nice bed; Sal and me slept in that ere
bed the night we were spliced. There’s plenty of room for two to kick about in
that bed; it’s an almighty big bed that. Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to
put our Sam and little Johnny in the foot of it. But I got a dreaming and
sprawling about one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came
near breaking his arm. Arter that, Sal said it wouldn’t do. Come along here,
I’ll give ye a glim in a jiffy;” and so saying he lighted a candle and held it
towards me, offering to lead the way. But I stood irresolute; when looking at
a clock in the corner, he exclaimed “I vum it’s Sunday—you won’t see that
harpooneer to-night; he’s come to anchor somewhere—come along then; _do_ come;
_won’t_ ye come?”

I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a
prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to sleep
abreast.

“There,” said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea chest that
did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; “there, make yourself
comfortable now, and good night to ye.” I turned round from eyeing the bed,
but he had disappeared.

Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of the most
elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. I then glanced round the
room; and besides the bedstead and centre table, could see no other furniture
belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four walls, and a papered
fireboard representing a man striking a whale. Of things not properly
belonging to the room, there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the
floor in one corner; also a large seaman’s bag, containing the harpooneer’s
wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk. Likewise, there was a parcel of
outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall
harpoon standing at the head of the bed.

But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close to the light,
and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at some
satisfactory conclusion concerning it. I can compare it to nothing but a large
door mat, ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something like the
stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in
the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos. But
could it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and
parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise? I put it on,
to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy and
thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneer had
been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit of glass stuck
against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my life. I tore myself out
of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink in the neck.

I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about this head-
peddling harpooneer, and his door mat. After thinking some time on the bed-
side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood in the middle of
the room thinking. I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my
shirt sleeves. But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was,
and remembering what the landlord said about the harpooneer’s not coming home
at all that night, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out
of my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed,
and commended myself to the care of heaven.

Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery, there is
no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not sleep for a long
time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a good
offing towards the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage,
and saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door.

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head-
peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken
to. Holding a light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the
other, the stranger entered the room, and without looking towards the bed,
placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then
began working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as
being in the room. I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted
for some time while employed in unlacing the bag’s mouth. This accomplished,
however, he turned round—when, good heavens! what a sight! Such a face! It was
of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with large
blackish looking squares. Yes, it’s just as I thought, he’s a terrible
bedfellow; he’s been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just from
the surgeon. But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the
light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those
black squares on his cheeks. They were stains of some sort or other. At first
I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to
me. I remembered a story of a white man—a whaleman too—who, falling among the
cannibals, had been tattooed by them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the
course of his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure. And
what is it, thought I, after all! It’s only his outside; a man can be honest
in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his unearthly complexion, that
part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely independent of the
squares of tattooing. To be sure, it might be nothing but a good coat of
tropical tanning; but I never heard of a hot sun’s tanning a white man into a
purplish yellow one. However, I had never been in the South Seas; and perhaps
the sun there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while
all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never
noticed me at all. But, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he
commenced fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a
seal-skin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the old chest in the
middle of the room, he then took the New Zealand head—a ghastly thing
enough—and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his hat—a new beaver
hat—when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise. There was no hair on his
head—none to speak of at least—nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on
his forehead. His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a
mildewed skull. Had not the stranger stood between me and the door, I would
have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner.

Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window, but it was
the second floor back. I am no coward, but what to make of this head-peddling
purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension. Ignorance is the parent of
fear, and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I
confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had
thus broken into my room at the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him
that I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory
answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.

Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his
chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were checkered with the
same squares as his face; his back, too, was all over the same dark squares;
he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years’ War, and just escaped from it with a
sticking-plaster shirt. Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel
of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms. It was now
quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of
a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian country. I
quaked to think of it. A peddler of heads too—perhaps the heads of his own
brothers. He might take a fancy to mine—heavens! look at that tomahawk!

But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about something
that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me that he must indeed
be a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or dreadnaught, which he
had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the pockets, and produced at
length a curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly
the colour of a three days’ old Congo baby. Remembering the embalmed head, at
first I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preserved in
some similar manner. But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it
glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing
but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now the savage goes up to
the empty fire-place, and removing the papered fire-board, sets up this little
hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the andirons. The chimney jambs and
all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made
a very appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.

I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling but ill at
ease meantime—to see what was next to follow. First he takes about a double
handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places them carefully before
the idol; then laying a bit of ship biscuit on top and applying the flame from
the lamp, he kindled the shavings into a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after
many hasty snatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his
fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded
in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he
made a polite offer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not
seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. All these
strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from the
devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan
psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural
manner. At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very
unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if
he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.

All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and seeing him now
exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations, and jumping
into bed with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before the light
was put out, to break the spell in which I had so long been bound.

But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one. Taking
up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for an instant, and
then holding it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed out
great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment the light was extinguished, and
this wild cannibal, tomahawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I
sang out, I could not help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment
he began feeling me.

Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him against the
wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might be, to keep quiet,
and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his guttural responses
satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my meaning.

“Who-e debel you?”—he at last said—“you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.” And so
saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark.

“Landlord, for God’s sake, Peter Coffin!” shouted I. “Landlord! Watch! Coffin!
Angels! save me!”

“Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!” again growled the
cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the hot
tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire. But thank
heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light in hand, and
leaping from the bed I ran up to him.

“Don’t be afraid now,” said he, grinning again, “Queequeg here wouldn’t harm a
hair of your head.”

“Stop your grinning,” shouted I, “and why didn’t you tell me that that
infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?”

“I thought ye know’d it;—didn’t I tell ye, he was a peddlin’ heads around
town?—but turn flukes again and go to sleep. Queequeg, look here—you sabbee
me, I sabbee—you this man sleepe you—you sabbee?”

“Me sabbee plenty”—grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and sitting up
in bed.

“You gettee in,” he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and throwing the
clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a civil but a really kind
and charitable way. I stood looking at him a moment. For all his tattooings he
was on the whole a clean, comely looking cannibal. What’s all this fuss I have
been making about, thought I to myself—the man’s a human being just as I am:
he has just as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better
sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.

“Landlord,” said I, “tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or
whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will turn in
with him. But I don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It’s
dangerous. Besides, I ain’t insured.”

This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely motioned
me to get into bed—rolling over to one side as much as to say—“I won’t touch a
leg of ye.”

“Good night, landlord,” said I, “you may go.”

I turned in, and never slept better in my life.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown over me
in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been
his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured
squares and triangles; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an
interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one
precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in
sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this
same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same
patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke,
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together;
and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that
Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I
well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up
the chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my
stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me
to bed supperless,—my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
packed me off to bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the
21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and
with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before
I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back
ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the
window, and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay
voices all over the house. I felt worse and worse—at last I got up, dressed,
and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and
suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to
give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have
ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must
have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from
it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was
now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural
hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged,
seemed closely seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I
lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and for
days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to
explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural
hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I
experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm thrown round me. But
at length all the past night’s events soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed
reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though I
tried to move his arm—unlock his bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he
still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I
now strove to rouse him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then
rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly
felt a slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty
pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with
a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of goodness, Queequeg,
wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently,
he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from
the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and
rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last,
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he
became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and
by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate sense
of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they
are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the
time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like
Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well worth unusual
regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one, by
the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his boots. What under
the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush
himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the bed; when, from sundry violent
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
private when putting on his boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in
the transition stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough
civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage, he
never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At last, he
emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and
began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed to
boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones—probably not made to order
either—rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold
morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the street
being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room,
and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made, staving
about with little else but his hat and boots on; I begged him as well as I
could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his
pantaloons as soon as possible. He complied, and then proceeded to wash
himself. At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face;
but Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and
taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into
water and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips
out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is
using Rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less
at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon
is made, and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
like a marshal’s baton.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him, though
he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a good
thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper person,
afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him
cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in that way. And the man that
has anything bountifully laughable about him, be sure there is more in that
man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night
previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were nearly all
whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters,
and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a
brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all
wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This young
fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to
smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian
voyage. That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say a touch of
satin wood is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic
tawn, but slightly bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks
ashore. But who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
tints, seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease in
manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though: Ledyard, the
great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they
possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But perhaps the mere crossing of
Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long
solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, which was the
sum of poor Mungo’s performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the
very best mode of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part,
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we
were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories
about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
silence. And not only that, but they looked embarrassed. Yes, here were a set
of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great
whales on the high seas—entire strangers to them—and duelled them dead without
winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same
calling, all of kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as
though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of the
table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I cannot say much
for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially justified his
bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and using it there without
ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many
heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him. But _that_ was certainly very
coolly done by him, and every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to
do anything coolly is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed coffee
and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest into the public
room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and
smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish an
individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a civilized
town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll
through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and
at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned
haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their
bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more curious,
certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town scores of green
Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the
fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance. Many are as
green as the Green Mountains whence they came. In some things you would think
them but a few hours old. Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He
wears a beaver hat and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and
sheath-knife. Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a downright
bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in
buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country dandy like
this takes it into his head to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the
great whale-fishery, you should see the comical things he does upon reaching
the seaport. In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his
waistcoats; straps to his canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, and
bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this day perhaps
have been in as howling condition as the coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of
her back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all New England. It is a
land of oil, true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them
with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find
more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a
country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion,
and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave houses and flowery
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. One and all, they
were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr
Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their daughters,
and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece. You must go to New
Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they have reservoirs of oil
in every house, and every night recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti
candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long avenues of
green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-
chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering upright cones
of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New
Bedford has superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
rocks thrown aside at creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But roses
only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial
as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye
cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk,
their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are the
moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to
make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this special
errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my
way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found a small scattered
congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows. A muffled silence
reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each silent
worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent
grief were insular and incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several
marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not pretend
to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost
overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_ 1 _st_ ,
1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER
CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’ crews OF THE
SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the Off-shore Ground in
the PACIFIC, _December_ 31 _st_ , 1839. THIS MARBLE Is here placed by their
surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows of his
boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_ 3 _d_ , 1833.
THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near
the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected
by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous
curiosity in his countenance. This savage was the only person present who
seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether
any of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among
flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that
broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black-bordered
marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly
perished without a grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Elephanta as here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales, though
containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is that to his name who
yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix so significant and infidel a
word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest
Indies of this living earth; why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-
forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless
maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to
hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will
terrify a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these dead
doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But somehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this
business of whaling—a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Eternity. But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
and Death. Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick water the
thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being. In fact
take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three cheers
for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they will, for stave
my soul, Jove himself cannot.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable robustness
entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a
quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation, sufficiently attested
that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite. He had
been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
dedicated his life to the ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple
was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems
merging into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom—the
spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No one having
previously heard his history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple
without the utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had
led. When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had
not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet,
and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with
the weight of the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes
were one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular
stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously
contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a
stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea. The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
bad taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case with
swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood, so
that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it
had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these joints in the
present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not prepared to see Father
Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole was
deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this. Father
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could
not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage. No,
thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore, it
must symbolize something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of physical
isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all
outward worldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and
wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self-
containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water
within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place, borrowed
from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either
hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned with a large
painting representing a gallant ship beating against a terrible storm off a
lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud
and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which
beamed forth an angel’s face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
radiance upon the ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now
inserted into the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the
angel seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off—serenest
azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that had
achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the likeness of
a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll
work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first descried, and the
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the God of breezes fair or
foul is first invoked for favourable winds. Yes, the world’s a ship on its
passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered the
scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away to
larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a still
slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and every eye on
the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his large brown
hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so
deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a bell in
a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he commenced reading
the following hymn; but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—

“The ribs and terrors in the whale,  
Arched over me a dismal gloom,  
While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by,  
And lift me deepening down to doom.  
  
“I saw the opening maw of hell,  
With endless pains and sorrows there;  
Which none but they that feel can tell—  
Oh, I was plunging to despair.  
  
“In black distress, I called my God,  
When I could scarce believe him mine,  
He bowed his ear to my complaints—  
No more the whale did me confine.  
  
“With speed he flew to my relief,  
As on a radiant dolphin borne;  
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone  
The face of my Deliverer God.  
  
“My song for ever shall record  
That terrible, that joyful hour;  
I give the glory to my God,  
His all the mercy and the power.”  

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the howling
of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves
of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
“Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of Jonah—‘And
God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one of the
smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the
soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this
prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly! How billow-
like and boisterously grand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea
is about us! But _what_ is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and
a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to
us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened
fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance
and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of
Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God—never mind now
what that command was, or how conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all
the things that God would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and
hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God,
we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the
hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men will carry him
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for
Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s
the opinion of learned men. And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain;
as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the
modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward
from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates,
that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most
contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye,
skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
hastening to cross the seas. So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that
had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of
something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a
fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends
accompany him to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging
search, he finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and
as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s evil eye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain
essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he
can be no innocent. In their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to
the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a
bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old
Gomorrah, or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to
read the bill that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship
is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and looks
from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round
Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and
summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He will not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion. So
he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his
papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless question mangles
Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. But he rallies. ‘I seek
a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy
Captain had not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but
no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
‘We sail with the next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still
intently eyeing him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that
goes a passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage money
how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written, shipmates, as
if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, ‘that he paid the
fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with the context, this is full
of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects crime in
any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In this world,
shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and without a passport;
whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain
prepares to test the length of Jonah’s purse, ere he judge him openly. He
charges him thrice the usual sum; and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows
that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
paves its rear with gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent
suspicions still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a
counterfeit. Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m travel-weary; I
need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain, ‘there’s thy room.’
Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing
him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters
something about the doors of convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked
within. All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The
air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that
stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels’
wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in
Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of
the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion,
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in
truth, infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
among which it hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that contradiction in
the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are
all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so
it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling,
but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse
but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that
miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for
annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he
feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for
conscience is the wound, and there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore
wrestlings in his berth, Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him
drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from
the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to
sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers! the
contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break. But now when the
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and
every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this
raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging
sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas
after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship—a
berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep. But the frightened
master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, ‘What meanest thou, O,
sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah
staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out
upon the sea. But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no
speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his cringing
attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The sailors mark him;
more and more certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully to test
the truth, by referring the whole matter to high Heaven, they fall to casting
lots, to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them. The lot is
Jonah’s; that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their
questions. ‘What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What
people? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager
mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive
an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand
of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who
hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well mightest
thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he but
too well knew the darkness of his deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to
them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_
sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
by other means to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls
louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when
instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as
Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water behind. He goes
down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds
the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the
whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his
prison. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe
his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not
weep and wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that
spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; not clamorous for
pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was this conduct
in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the
whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but
I do place him before you as a model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do,
take heed to repent of it like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking, slanting
storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when describing
Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest heaved as
with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work; and
the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping
from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that
was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of
the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for
the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly, with
an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press upon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches
to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, for I am a greater
sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and
sit on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some
one of you reads _me_ that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to
_me_ , as a pilot of the living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths
in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached. As we
have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living
gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along ‘into the midst of the
seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the
weeds were wrapped about his head,’ and all the watery world of woe bowled
over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of
hell’—when the whale grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’ when the word of the
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten—his ears, like two sea-
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s
bidding. And what was that, shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of
Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of the
living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into
a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal! Woe to him whose
good name is more to him than goodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts
not dishonor! Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were
salvation! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while
preaching to others is himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to
him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against the proud gods and
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no
quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck
it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and
is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his, who coming to
lay him down, can say with his final breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by
Thy rod—mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than
to be this world’s, or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to
Thee; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with his
hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed, and he was
left alone in the place.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite
alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time. He was
sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, and in
one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his;
peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its
nose, meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to the
table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began counting
the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page—as I
fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and giving utterance
to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He would then begin again at
the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each time, as though he
could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of
fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and hideously
marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance yet had a something
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot hide the soul. Through
all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest
heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens
of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. And besides all this, there was
a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had
a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it
otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his
head was phrenologically an excellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it
reminded me of General Washington’s head, as seen in the popular busts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows,
which were likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded
on top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence, never
troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied
with counting the pages of the marvellous book. Considering how sociably we
had been sleeping together the night previous, and especially considering the
affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I
thought this indifference of his very strange. But savages are strange beings;
at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first they are
overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic
wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
little, with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. All
this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was
something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from
home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only way he could get
there—thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost
serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself. Surely
this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there
was such a thing as that. But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals
should not be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that
such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like
the dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild
stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows
to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming
without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a
melting in me. No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned
against the wolfish world. This soothing savage had redeemed it. There he sat,
his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet
I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things
that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has
proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly
signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At first he little
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night’s
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows. I
told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little
complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to him the
purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we went to jabbering the best
we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town. Soon I
proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly
offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of
his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
country’s phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
need should be. In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
savage those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver;
then spreading them on the table, and mechanically dividing them into two
equal portions, pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine. I was
going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’
pockets. I let them stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
idol, and removed the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I
thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to
follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply
or otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you suppose
now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth—pagans and all
included—can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood?
Impossible! But what is worship?—to do the will of God— _that_ is worship. And
what is the will of God?—to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow
man to do to me— _that_ is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my
particular Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with
him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped prop
up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed
before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world. But we did
not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the very
bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie and chat
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay
I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and Queequeg
now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and
then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when,
at last, by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained in
us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again, though day-break
was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position began to
grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up; the
clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board with our four
knees drawn up close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if our
kneepans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since it
was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there
was no fire in the room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this
world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been so a
long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But if, like
Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be
slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason a sleeping apartment
should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the luxurious
discomforts of the rich. For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to
have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the
outer air. Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an
arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at once I
thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by
night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes
shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed. Because
no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if
darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
congenial to our clayey part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my
own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
of the unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he
felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk. Be it said,
that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once
comes to bend them. For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg
smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy
of insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy jackets
drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other,
till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by
the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far
distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager
to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet
subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar with his broken
phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in
the mere skeleton I give.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass
clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green sapling; even
then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see something
more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two. His father was a High
Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side he boasted
aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood
in his veins—royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a passage to
Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of seamen, spurned
his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence could prevail. But
Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait,
which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island. On one
side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with
mangrove thickets that grew out into the water. Hiding his canoe, still
afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern,
paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted
out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his
canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in
pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a cutlass
over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and Queequeg budged
not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him he might make himself
at home. But this fine young savage—this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the
Captain’s cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of
him. But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts
whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon
convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked;
infinitely more so, than all his father’s heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag
Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
and seeing how they spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave
it up for lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer ways about
him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having a
coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he being
very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet; and added
that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians, had unfitted him for
ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him. But
by and by, he said, he would return,—as soon as he felt himself baptized
again. For the nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild
oats in all four oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I
told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention to
sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same
mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his,
boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joyously assented;
for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced
harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who,
like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me,
pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over
from each other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber, for a
block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my comrade’s
money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly
tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and
Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories about him had
previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied
with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to “the
Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf. As we were
going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much—for they were used to
seeing cannibals like him in their streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such
confidential terms. But we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by
turns, and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
barbs. I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a
particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff,
well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of
whales. In short, like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the
farmers’ meadows armed with their own scythes—though in no wise obliged to
furnish them—even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own
harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the
first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The owners of his
ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his
boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the thing—though in truth he was
entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow—Queequeg
puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and
marches up the wharf. “Why,” said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better
than that, one would think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of Rokovoko, it
seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts
into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and this punchbowl always
forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its
commander—from all accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least
for a sea captain—this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Queequeg’s sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over against
the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the King,
Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their grace as well
as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance upwards to
the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I say, being said, the High Priest opens
the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his
consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain precedence over a
mere island King, especially in the King’s own house—the Captain coolly
proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge
finger-glass. “Now,” said Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people
laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford
rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all glittering in the
clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon
her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and
safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and
coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all
betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third,
and so on, for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the
intolerableness of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss
tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I
snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike earth!—that common
highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned
me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me. His
dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we
flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and
dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan. Sideways leaning, we sideways
darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling scene were we, as we
stood by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the
jeering glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were
anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the
heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with
bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him,
lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know you might have
killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing to the
still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e so
small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_ , you cannibal, if you try
any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to mind
his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-
sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, completely
sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor fellow whom Queequeg had
handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. It flew from right
to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
seemed on the point of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing
seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood
eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end
to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the
boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was run into the wind, and while the
hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For three minutes or
more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out
before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming to see just how
matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes more, and he rose
again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless
form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor bumpkin was restored. All hands
voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon. From that hour I
clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long
dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he at all
deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for
water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry
clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing
those around him, seemed to be saying to himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock
world, in all meridians. We cannibals must help these Christians.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a fine
run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of the
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach,
without a background. There is more sand there than you would use in twenty
years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights will tell you
that they have to plant weeds there, they don’t grow naturally; that they
import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop
a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like
bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before
their houses, to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass
makes an oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear
quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut
up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of
by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes
be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these extravaganzas
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons. With
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
waters. They resolved to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
found an empty ivory casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to
the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand;
grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they
pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great
ships on the sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons
and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan,
salt-sea Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from their
ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like so many
Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America add Mexico to
Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India, and
hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous
globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships are
but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and
privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder
other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in
ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. _There_ is his
home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood would not interrupt,
though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as
prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as
chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when
he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her
wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the
Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor,
and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no business that day, at
least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had
recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
his chowders. In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
than try pot-luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about
keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church
to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first man we
met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us
at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow
warehouse—our first point of departure—must be left on the larboard hand,
whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However,
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then knocking up a
peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to something which
there was no mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears, swung
from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, so that this
old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows. Perhaps I was over sensitive
to such impressions at the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows
with a vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the
two remaining horns; yes, _two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It’s ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling
port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out oblique
hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with
yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull
red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, and carrying on
a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?” says
I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time, ain’t
it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt, who
was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word
“clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and
bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on
one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently
cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends! hearken to me. It was
made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded
ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched
with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites
being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly
excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment
and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the
word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good time
a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I to
myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s that
stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look, Queequeg, ain’t
that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for fish-
bones coming through your clothes. The area before the house was paved with
clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and
Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was
a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching along
the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I
assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up
the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his harpoon; she
allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I; “every true whaleman
sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because it’s dangerous,” says she.
“Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was
gone four years and a half, with only three barrels of _ile_ , was found dead
in my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow
no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr.
Queequeg” (for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron,
and keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for
breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no small
concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been diligently
consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo had told him two or
three times over, and strongly insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our
going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our
craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us;
and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to
myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast of
things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather good sort of
god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in all cases did not
succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection of our
craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little relied upon
Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon
Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about
this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should
quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving
Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was
some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for, though I
applied myself to it several times, I never could master his liturgies and
XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo
warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the
shipping. After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
that there were three ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the
Tit-bit, and the Pequod. _Devil-Dam_ , I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_
is obvious; _Pequod_ , you will no doubt remember, was the name of a
celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit;
and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and
then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;—square-
toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not;
but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare
old Pequod. She was a ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with
an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained
in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was
darkened like a French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts stood
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these her old antiquities,
were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that
for more than half a century she had followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years
her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his own, and now a
retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg,
during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original
grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and
device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A cannibal
of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies. All
round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw,
with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to
fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base
blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. A
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with
that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority, in
order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody;
but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather wigwam,
pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed only a temporary erection
used in port. It was of a conical shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part
of the jaws of the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and
at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to
and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider
commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his
aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship’s work
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. He was seated
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of the
elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily
rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style; only there was a fine
and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his
eyes, which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales,
and always looking to windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to
become pursed together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of the
tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?” he
demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a stove
boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been several
voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the
marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose now ye feel
considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships. But flukes! man,
what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it looks a little suspicious, don’t
it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain,
didst thou?—Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of these
half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish
Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of shipping
ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the
voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are part owners
and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest to know what whaling
is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye
bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man,
and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up,
crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the
hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could,
“What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have
inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou dost not
talk shark a bit. _Sure_ , ye’ve been to sea before now; sure of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the
merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant service—don’t
aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each other. I have given
thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale’s
throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to be got
rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find out by
experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to see the world?
Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just step forward there,
and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye
see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not knowing
exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But concentrating
all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship
swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards
the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and
forbidding; not the slightest variety that I could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though, and
there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go round
Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the Pequod
was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now repeated to
Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come along with
ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising
figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was
one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares, as is sometimes the
case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows,
fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. People in
Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do
yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a Quaker, the
island having been originally settled by that sect; and to this day its
inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the
Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and
heterogeneous. For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all
sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with Scripture
names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in childhood naturally
imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from
the audacious, daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of
character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath
constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think untraditionally
and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or savage impressions fresh
from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but
with some help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
language—that man makes one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant
creature, formed for noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him,
dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what
seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For all
men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of
this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. But, as yet we
have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who,
if indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman. But
unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called serious things,
and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all
trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the
strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and
the sight of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn—all that had
not moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered
one angle of his vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had
illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human
bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did
not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
sage and sensible conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this
practical world quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an incorrigible
old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard task-master. They told me
in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed
the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man,
especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
least. He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he
got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at
you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something—a
hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,
never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished before him. His own person
was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt
body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed
Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks was small; and
there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and
this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs
were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and
spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been studying
those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How
far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate, Bildad,
without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and seeing me,
glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_ ,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book
in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg, his
friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only
looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the
ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little
table. I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already aware that in the
whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
received certain shares of the profits called _lays_ , and that these lays
were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective
duties of the ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at
whaling, my own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay—that is,
the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might
eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather
_long lay_ , yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak
of my three years’ beef and board, for which I would not have to pay one
stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those that
never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world is
ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this grim sign of the
Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the 275th lay would be about the
fair thing, but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about receiving
a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard something of
both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad; how that they being
the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore the other and more
inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the whole management of the
ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad
might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now
found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering
that he was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “ _Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay shall we
give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do corrupt, but
_lay_ —’”

_Lay_ , indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and seventy-
seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one, shall not _lay_
up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an
exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from the magnitude of the
figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest consideration
will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large
number, yet, when you come to make a _teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say,
that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal
less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at
the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to swindle
this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting his
eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do ye hear
that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said, “Captain
Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the duty thou owest
to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans, many of them—and that if
we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man, we may be taking the
bread from those widows and those orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-
seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
“Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I
would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to
founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing ten
inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art still an
impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a
leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit,
Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye insult
me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to
hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me, and start my soul-
bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns
on. Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight
wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a marvellous
oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible
owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in
a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from
the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to
vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat
down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
intention of withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his
ways. As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a little as
if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the squall’s gone
off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs the grindstone. That’s he;
thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship too—shall
I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he
had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever whaled it
any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the Captain with
whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a
whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for
sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so
exceedingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing
concernment of that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in
port, but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is
always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself
into his hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou art
shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know exactly
what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of
sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t sick; but no, he isn’t well
either. Any how, young man, he won’t always see me, so I don’t suppose he will
thee. He’s a queer man, Captain Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt
like him well enough; no fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Captain Ahab; doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than the
waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales. His
lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle! Oh! he ain’t
Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg; _he’s Ahab_ , boy; and Ahab of
old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not
lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in his eye
that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. ’Twas a foolish,
ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was only a
twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name
would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell
thee the same. I wish to warn thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve
sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious,
good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s
a good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I
know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell;
but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last
voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a kind of moody—desperate moody, and
savage sometimes; but that will all pass off. And once for all, let me tell
thee and assure thee, young man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain
than a laughing bad one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab,
because he happens to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not
three voyages wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl
that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally
revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of
painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a
sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his
leg. And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I
cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I
felt it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all day, I
did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I cherish the
greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations, never mind how
comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation
of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of
our earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other
planets, bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things,
and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what
not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects. There was
Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and
his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I
suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest. All our arguing with
him would not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
all—Presbyterians and Pagans alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked
about the head, and sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals
must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but no answer. I
tried to open it, but it was fastened inside. “Queequeg,” said I softly
through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say, Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s
I—Ishmael.” But all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had
allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the
room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only
see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of
Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous had taken from
him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange, thought I; but at any
rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad
without it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened. Apoplexy! I
tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted. Running down stairs,
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met—the chamber-maid.
“La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must be the matter. I went to make
the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard;
and it’s been just so silent ever since. But I thought, may be, you had both
gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress!
murder! Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the
kitchen, I following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke; depend
upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-
handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the
entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it
open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as
to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying open any of my
doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the matter with you? What’s
the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand the whole
case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she
ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t seen it since I put it
there.” Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she
glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s
killed himself,” she cried. “It’s unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there
goes another counterpane—God pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my
house. Has the poor lad a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to
Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides
permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds
at once. Kill? The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there?
You, young man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the
door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the locksmith,
there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her hand in her side-
pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s see.” And with that, she
turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained
unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a little, for
a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing I should not break
down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed
myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the
wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens! there sat
Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head. He looked neither
one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt like
pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost intolerable,
it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all
probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours, going
too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to
take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could do—for all my polite
arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor
even look at me, nor notice my presence in the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they
fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so; yes, it’s
part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll get up sooner or
later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long stories
of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called
it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig, confined to the
north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only); after listening to these plum-
puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling
quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
termination. But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had not
stirred an inch. I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright
senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his
hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have some
supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But not a word did he
reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no
doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to turning in, I
took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a
very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on. For some
time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had blown out
the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there
in that uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake
pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of day;
when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been
screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the
window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again against mine; and
said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion, be it
what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
because that other person don’t believe it also. But when a man’s religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed now,
and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise and
progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions
of the present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms
were stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense. I told him, too, that
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
this ridiculous Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave
in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In one
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary
dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in. He said no;
only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given by his
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
had been killed by about two o’clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who had
visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a great
battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden
of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden
trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with the victor’s
compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents were so many
Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression
upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing
on that important subject, unless considered from his own point of view; and,
in the second place, he did not more than one third understand me, couch my
ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal
more about the true religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of
condescending concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity
that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
pagan piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much
profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from
his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft, unless
they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from behind
Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted. Son of
darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present in communion
with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here be it
said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be
converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in Deacon
Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out his
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not very long,
I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it would have
washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon
Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord’s
day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said I; “all
I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational
Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same ancient
Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg
here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us belong; the great
and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all
belong to that; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching
the grand belief; in _that_ we all join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer. “Young
man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast hand; I never
heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father Mapple himself couldn’t
beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come aboard, come aboard; never mind
about the papers. I say, tell Quohog there—what’s that you call him? tell
Quohog to step along. By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or
whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you
ever strike a fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well, spose
him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron
right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the ship’s decks, and struck
the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e eye;
why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close vicinity of
the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway. “Quick, I say,
you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must have Hedgehog there, I mean
Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay,
and that’s more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled
among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know how to
write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name or make thy
mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken part in
similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered pen, copied
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a queer round
figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg’s
obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at
last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted
drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled “The Latter
Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in Queequeg’s hands, and then
grasping them and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and
said, “Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this
ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest
to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a
Belial bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of
the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,” cried
Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the shark out of
’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish. There was young
Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the
Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good. He got so frightened
about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself, as I
myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou
went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st thou not think of Death and the Judgment
then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye. Think of
that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death and the Judgment
then? What? With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against
the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the
Judgment then? No! no time to think about Death then. Life was what Captain
Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-
masts—how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where we
followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who
were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick up a
patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but shabbily apparelled
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief investing
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face,
and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little more
time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm, and
then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his
pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though, I know
many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are all the better
off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“ _He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere;
he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder yet,
have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his
manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye hav’n’t seen
him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be all
right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive
sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of
mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s a good
whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when he
gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with Captain
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?—heard nothing
about that, eh? Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye
did; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever,
mayhap, ye’ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard
of that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they know
he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don’t know,
and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in
the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there, the
Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of his leg.”

“ _All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger
stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned
and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the papers? Well, well,
what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will be; and then again, perhaps
it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all fixed and arranged a’ready; and some
sailors or other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men,
God pity ’em! Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless
ye; I’m sorry I stopped ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell us, out
with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your
game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are
just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning! Oh!
when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It is the
easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in
him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each other’s
fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was nothing but a
humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred
yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who
should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance. Somehow, the
sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger
would turn the same corner that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that
he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-
revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague
wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and
Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day
previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound
ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging
us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg, and on that
side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice
us. This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me, I
pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod. Not only
were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on board, and bolts
of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything betokened that the
ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain Peleg seldom or never
went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-
fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at all
the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests must be on
board before night, for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be
sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
ashore till the last. But it seems they always give very long notice in these
cases, and the ship did not sail for several days. But no wonder; there was a
good deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought
of, before the Pequod was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and forks,
shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are indispensable to
the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which necessitates a
three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all grocers,
costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And though this also holds true
of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing
them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of
all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and
spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain
and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod
had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron
hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a continual
fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things, both large
and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad’s
sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but
withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_ could help it,
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to
sea. At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the
steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate’s
desk, where he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small
of some one’s rheumatic back. Never did any woman better deserve her name,
which was Charity—Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-
saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board,
as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer
whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all
backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles
needed, and at every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article
upon the paper. Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone
den, roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and
as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to
come on board his ship. To these questions they would answer, that he was
getting better and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the
two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit
the vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest with myself, I would
have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was
to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the
open sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I said
nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly
sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early start.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we drew
nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close behind us,
laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us,
stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering
from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you know, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We are
going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder,
said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while
ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes, I
thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and touching
my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I was
going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one, all in the
family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to ye. Shan’t see ye
again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the Grand Jury.” And with these
cracked words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound quiet,
not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the hatches were all
on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the forecastle, we
found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a light, we went down, and found
only an old rigger there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at
whole length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
arms. The profoundest slumber slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I, looking
dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had
not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would have thought myself to
have been optically deceived in that matter, were it not for Elijah’s
otherwise inexplicable question. But I beat the thing down; and again marking
the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with
the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon
the sleeper’s rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without
more ado, sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then; but how
hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it’s
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look, he’ll twitch you off
soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted
his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing over the
sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken
fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his land, owing to the
absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people
generally, were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for
ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to
buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much better than those
garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a
chief calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from
me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe, which,
it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul,
when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong vapor now
completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him. He breathed
with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved
over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain came
aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate, that;
good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so saying he
went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the
riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of
the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board. Meanwhile
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s riggers, and
after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the ever-
thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift—a night-
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the
steward—after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the
cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is all
ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh? Well, call all
hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said Bildad, “but
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg
and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as
if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in
port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they
said he was in the cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no
means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to
sea. Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and
as he was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin
table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before they
quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was
now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not
Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the Pequod,
for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next
thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and the crew
sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot is the
forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in
addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilots of the port—he
being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the
Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted
any other craft—Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed
a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that no
profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in getting
under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts
in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped and
swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he would sink the
ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused on my
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both
ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting
myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some
salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a
sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
immediate vicinity. That was my first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared. “Spring, thou
sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye spring, I say, all of
ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there,
Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring
your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there
using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with
his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-
day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It was a
short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we
found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased
us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old
craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over
her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard,—


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we
call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke,
though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the
joke is at nobody’s expense but his own. However, nothing dispirits, and
nothing seems worth while disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind
how knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun
flints. And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him
only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the
unseen and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it
comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before might
have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I
was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; “Queequeg, my
fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?” Without much emotion,
though soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things
did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his oil-
jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I think I
have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose then, that going
plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of
a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape
Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing close by;
“you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you tell me whether
it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I should
like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha!
the whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement of the
entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water
and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of common occurrence in
this kind of life; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of
going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered
the boat—oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the
teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous
for his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this
uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in what a devil’s
chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
“Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last
wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more fond of that
diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the
same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion, I felt
all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I
should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the
case might be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my
chest. I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock, here
goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the devil fetch
the hindmost.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg you
would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my
timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask. “If his
leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing. That would
disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that with
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought
not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his
entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase,
for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a
regular headsman in the hunt—above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with
five extra men, as that same boat’s crew, he well knew that such generous
conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had
not solicited a boat’s crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his
desires on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
touching all that matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had
little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats
for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was
thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small
wooden skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove
in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make
it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the
anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing the
knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-
circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter’s chisel gouged out a
little here and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But almost everybody
supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be
with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew being
assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned away; for
in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of
the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves
often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea
on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create any
unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms
soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were somehow
distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery
to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of
unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab’s peculiar
fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven
knows, but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew. But
one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a
creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the
unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of
the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even
in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of
earth’s primal generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each
other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were
created and to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical
Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept
across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off the Cape de
Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.
Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight
night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their
soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude;
on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some
plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first descried this
jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what emotions,
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But when, after spending his
uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single
sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was heard announcing
that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if
some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
“There she blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have
quivered more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The best man
in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-
up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency
of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant,
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct
to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you
watched Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and
death this old man walked. But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though
from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was
no more seen that night. Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after,
lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
had never been. And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or
starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two
days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
ever alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance with the
preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested the Pequod,
were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever
descried; at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes and
longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale; and that
whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at
this flitting apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on,
in order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the
remotest and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all
space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life
before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began howling
around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that are there;
when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the dark
waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips, the foam-flakes flew
over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave
place to sights more dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of our
hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed
our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation,
and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And heaved and
heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a
conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the
long sin and suffering it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called of yore;
for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us, we
found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
horizon. But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would
at times be descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for the time
the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested
the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates. In
tempestuous times like these, after everything above and aloft has been
secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the
gale. Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg
inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud,
Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes
together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the
perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the
bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each
man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
he swung as in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent
ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in
silence the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek that
repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old man’s aspect, when
one night going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and
half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him
lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currents which have previously
been spoken of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the
body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed
towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground
for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she
slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at
sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the skeleton of
a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral appearance was traced
with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her rigging were
like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower
sails were set. A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a
fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern,
we six men in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have
leaped from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word
to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in the act
of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the
sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make himself heard
without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between. While
in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance
of this ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale’s name
to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind
forbade. But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his
trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the Pequod,
bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific
ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger’s
flanks. Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
capriciously carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water. There
seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. But turning to the
steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish her
headway, he cried out in his old lion voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the
world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings; but
whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through numberless perils
to the very point whence we started, where those that we left behind secure,
were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever
reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange than any
Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of
that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims before all human hearts;
while chasing such over this round globe, they either lead us on in barren
mazes or midway leave us whelmed.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken
was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this not been the
case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her—judging by his
subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had been that, by the process
of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put. For, as
it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with
any stranger captain, except he could contribute some of that information he
so absorbingly sought. But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were
not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting
each other in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally
desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering each other in
such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid
a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news; and,
perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert: then, how much more
natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the
sea, two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off
lone Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural, I
say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange
hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact. And
especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case of vessels
owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the men
are personally known to each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear
domestic things to talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on board;
at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or
two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. And in return
for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling
intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true
concerning whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of them
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now far remote
vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now
meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable
chat. For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but
likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit
and mutually shared privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference; that is,
so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and
English. Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such
meetings do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to
be a sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and
your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to
say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales than
all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this is a harmless little
foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the whalers
have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships
crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on
without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually cutting each other
on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time
indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-
War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not
seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at
all. As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious
hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail is—“How
many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many barrels?” And that
question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal
villains on both sides, and don’t like to see overmuch of each other’s
villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-
easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort
of decent weather? She has a “ _Gam_ ,” a thing so utterly unknown to all
other ships that they never heard of the name even; and if by chance they
should hear of it, they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about
“spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and such like pretty exclamations. Why it is
that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and
Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this
is a question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates,
say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar
glory about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in
boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the
pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up and down
the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never
attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not hold it. Nevertheless,
this same expressive word has now for many years been in constant use among
some fifteen thousand true born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a definition, and
should be incorporated into the Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly
define it.

GAM. NOUN— _A social meeting of two_ ( _or more_ ) _Whaleships, generally on a
cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats’
crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship, and the
two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the
whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is
rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a
comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a
pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at
all. High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on
castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
complete boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his
visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that being
conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides
of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance of
sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor is this any very easy
matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his
knees in front. He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden,
violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread
angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, it would never
do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for
this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets;
but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or
two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s hair, and
hold on there like grim death.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

( _As told at the Golden Inn._ )

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound
whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned almost wholly by
Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby
Dick. To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s story, which seemed obscurely to
involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those
so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men. This
latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached
the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the private property of
three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in
that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept the
secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-
mast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed
to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at
Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint’s eve, smoking
upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine cavaliers,
the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer terms with me; and
hence the interluding questions they occasionally put, and which are duly
answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket, was
cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward from the
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed
that she made more water in her hold than common. They supposed a sword-fish
had stabbed her, gentlemen. But the captain, having some unusual reason for
believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore
being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all
dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her
cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but
no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that now taking some
alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,
because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them,
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free; never mind if
the leak should double on her. In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage
being attended by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly
arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a
Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and
desperado from Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’ said Don
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your courtesy—may be,
you shall soon hear further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed
out of your old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing
aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron,
and Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of
the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of
climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the
Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two great contrasting
nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our
numerous territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns
of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories;
at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked
by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric
beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed
cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by
Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they
know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have
drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus,
gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney, though in
his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at
his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed our austere
Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full
of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-
horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-
hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil
indeed, might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency
of human recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had
proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt—but,
gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for
her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again increasing, but only so
as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You must know that in a
settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers
think little of pumping their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that
respect, the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor in
the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it
altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full
chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a
tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded
them. It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of
those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by several
of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the upper sails to
be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now
this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to
any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine,
gentlemen. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the
ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a
part owner in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there
was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the pumps ran
across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-
holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional world
of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command over his
fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general
pride of manhood, straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable
dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and
pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. Be
this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall
and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the
tasseled housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had
he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a
mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. He did not love Steelkilt, and
Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest,
the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay
banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I tell ye what,
men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut away his part of the
hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job;
he’s come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
and what not; and the whole posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and
slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here
now, I’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil
with his estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I
wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney, pretending
not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys, lively,
now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red,
his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now what
cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a
man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and
sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household work
which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it
has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the
time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive
love of neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without
first washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business is the
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had
been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all these particulars
so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his
face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this; and
all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate
uttered his command. But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
looked into the mate’s malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks
heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir
up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a repugnance most
felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved—this
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping the
deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then, without at all
alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customary sweepers;
who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To
this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the still
seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched
from a cask near by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all
his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill
brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration
within him, without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at
last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face,
furiously commanding him to do his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily followed
by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not
to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest effect,
by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the
foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the two
went once slowly round the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to
retreat, bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his
humor, the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where the
Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth;
meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions. Retreating not the
thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and
creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed
his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been
branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the
cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he
fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading
far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads. They
were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our harbours,
but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal. You must
have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land,
we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such information
may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through the
holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through
sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting
scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream
of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee,
gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches. For by
some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen, most
abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded
plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in Lima,’
laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all us
Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means
overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice
in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look surprised; you know the
proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.” It but bears out your saying,
too; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open—and
“Corrupt as Lima.” So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the
blessed evangelist, St. Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I
refill; now, you pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would make a
fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark
Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently
floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot
thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The
brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-
ribboned hat betoken his grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of
the villages through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your
man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger
in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness
of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-
fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any
race of mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between
quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters
of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha upon his
silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I had thought, now,
that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the
hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly had he
done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four
harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down the ropes like
baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag
their man out of it towards the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with
them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of
harm’s way, the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along
to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick
out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too
much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,
hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them with a
pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come out of that, ye
cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the
worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly,
that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the
part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to
return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to sink the
ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he once more raised a
pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us turns
to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men?’
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye on the
Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our fault; we
didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was boy’s business; he
might have known me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo; I
believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw; ain’t those
mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my
hearties. Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool;
forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men;
but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him, ‘there
are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for the cruise,
d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as soon as the
anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s not our interest; we want to be
peaceable; we are ready to work, but we won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what it is
now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we
won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word
about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till ye’re
sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against it;
but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their
dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain and
his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide of the
scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway. Then
opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down the crack,
closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten in number—leaving on deck some
twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and aft,
especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which last place
it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead
below. But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still remained
at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at
intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck, summoned the
prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down
to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it; when again
turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the
quarter-deck. Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the
customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air,
and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution,
had constrained them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the
Captain reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. On
the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from
the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of seven of
his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed
him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of
despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers, thus far
apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their hole at the next
summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long,
crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible,
seize the ship. For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the
scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they
were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on
deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this their leader as
fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his
two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of
them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own separate
soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece of treachery,
namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the three,
though the last of the ten, to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small
chance of pardon such conduct might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his
determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when
their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he and all
his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes
the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies, who at once
claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder. But
all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and,
side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of
meat, and there they hung till morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing
to and fro before them, ‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from
those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a
good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the whole, he would do so—he
ought to—justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing a
rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads sideways, as the two
crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still rope
enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take that gag from
his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped
jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss,
‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with the
rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain; who,
to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck rapidly two or
three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, ‘I won’t do
it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man, with
a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he
had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the tumult on the deck, he
had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole scene. Such was the state of
his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about _his_
being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched
the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking, when
another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing no more,
made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that might have
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to, and,
sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor was
heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up, besieged
the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. Entreaties,
cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own instance they were
put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared
among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt’s
instigation, they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey
all orders to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to
another thing—namely, not to sing out for whales, in case any should be
discovered. For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the
Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing
to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth
for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of
the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till all was
over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung
him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney the chief mate’s watch;
and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his
doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night. Upon this, and
one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his
revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the bulwarks
of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which
was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In this attitude, it was
well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a considerable vacancy between the
boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two
o’clock, in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been
betrayed. At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
carefully in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length before
him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough twine,—have you
any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_ ’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help himself in
the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given him—neither twine nor
lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was
tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his
trick at the silent helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
always ready dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and stretched
as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he
had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For
by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his
hands into its own the damning thing he would have done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second day,
when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing
water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There she rolls! there she
rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do whales
have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but that
would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more into
the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so suddenly
perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship—forgetful of the
compact among the crew—in the excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had
instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for
some little time past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-
heads. All was now a phrensy. ‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry
from captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were
all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew
eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living
opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole
career of these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was
charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in the
prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when
the four boats were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more
fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. And now his
bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back. Nothing loath, his
bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a sunken
ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate. That instant, as he
fell on the whale’s slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed aside by
the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of
the whale. He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly
seen through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby
Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and
went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had slackened
the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he
thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the
boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He cut it; and the whale was
free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of
Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him. All
four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly
disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary place—where no
civilized creature resided. There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or six
of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as it
turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail
for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called upon
the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving down the ship
to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies
was this small band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so
extreme was the hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready
again for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst
not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his
officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning
the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him,
and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind
for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his
crew.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow of
his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to
engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced
by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then
were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders leaning
against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed
an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body; though my body still
continued to sway as a pendulum will, long after the power which first moved
it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at
the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that at last all three
of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman. The waves, too, nodded
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my hands
grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me; with a
shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off,
a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull of a
frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun’s
rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever
and anon tranquilly spouting his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly
burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was
thy last. As if struck by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every
sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of
voices from all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he dashed
the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere the
boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward, but with
such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam, that
thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not
an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers. So seated like
Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled
along; the calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as
we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty
feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite was
granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose
again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and much nearer to it
than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture. It was
obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. All
silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use. Paddles were dropped,
and oars came loudly into play. And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered
on his crew to the assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy, he was
going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad yeast which he
brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of time—but
start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried Stubb, spluttering
out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em the long and strong
stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start her, all; but keep cool, keep
cool—cucumbers is the word—easy, easy—only start her like grim death and
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
boys—that’s all. Start her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old war-
whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat involuntarily
bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke which the eager Indian
gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee! Kee-
hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat, like a
pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of
Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still encouraged his men to
the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from his mouth. Like desperadoes
they tugged and they strained, till the welcome cry was heard—“Stand up,
Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen
backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along every one
of their wrists. It was the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of
its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled
with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round and round the
loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed
through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally
dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by
the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into it.* More turns
were taken, so that the line began holding its place. The boat now flew
through the boiling water like a shark all fins. Stubb and Tashtego here
changed places—stem for stern—a staggering business truly in that rocking
commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part of the
boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you would have
thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the other the air—as
the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once. A continual
cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the
slightest motion from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating,
cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea. Thus they
rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole
Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length
the whale somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round towards the
whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yet the boat was
being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish; at the word
of command, the boat alternately sterning out of the way of the whale’s
horrible wallow, and then ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbled and seethed
for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun playing upon this crimson
pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all
glowed to each other like red men. And all the while, jet after jet of white
smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling
in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it
again and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in
his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into
the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously
seeking to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and
which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch
he sought was the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for,
starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable,
mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern,
had much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the
clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;
surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting his spout-
hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last, gush after gush of
clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the
frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks
into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth, Stubb
scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood thoughtfully
eyeing the vast corpse he had made.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes off
from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary steersman, and
the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar, the one known as
the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to strike the first
iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy
implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. But
however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull
his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example
of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by
repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at
the top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I cannot
bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time. In this
straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at once the
exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He
now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize
his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he
essays to pitch it somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet
of whalemen in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in
the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with four
barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern;
for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out
of his body how can you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant, that
is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer likewise start
to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one
else. It is then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of
the little craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and
unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he
should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be
expected of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman. I know
that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but
long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me
that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means
been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this world
must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out of toil.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in productive
subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention. It is a
notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is
perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the
purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose
other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow. Thereby the weapon
is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its
rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall. It is customary to have
two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with the
line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one instantly
after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag, one
should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It is a doubling of the
chances. But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it becomes
impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to
pitch the second iron into him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at
all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentioned
in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudently
practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it
thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror, skittishly curvetting
about both boat and whale, entangling the lines, or cutting them, and making a
prodigious sensation in all directions. Nor, in general, is it possible to
secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one
unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these qualities in
him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious
enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling
about him. For, of course, each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend
on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in scenes
hereafter to be painted.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a calm; so,
forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow business of towing the
trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms,
and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at
all, except at long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
enormousness of the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or
whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand
argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s main-rigging
dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several
more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a
moment, he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come
forward again until morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had evinced his
customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was dead, some
vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if
the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would
not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have
thought from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck,
and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links, the
vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by the head to the
stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its black hull
close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness of the night, which
obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship and whale, seemed yoked
together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known on
deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an unusual but
still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the
staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
the sole management of affairs. One small, helping cause of all this
liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest. Stubb was a high liver;
he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut me one
from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general thing,
and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray the current
expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage),
yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising
the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of
sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-
head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
smackingly feasted on its fatness. The few sleepers below in their bunks were
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a
few inches of the sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see
them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the
whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the shark seems
all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they
contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks will
be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs round a
table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed man that
is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the deck-table
are thus cannibally carving each other’s live meat with carving-knives all
gilded and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy in
case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down, touching
the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate,
and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial
spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at
sea. If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision about the
propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on
so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean
lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his legs
still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper; and, at the
same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance;
“cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously roused from
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when,
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth,
“don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been beating this steak
too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say that to be good, a whale-
steak must be tough? There are those sharks now over the side, don’t you see
they prefer it tough and rare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and
talk to ’em; tell ’em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
moderation, but they must keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one
from his sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the
bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as
to get a good view of his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly
flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began
addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that
was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say dat you can
fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you must stop dat dam
racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the
shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re
preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and Fleece
continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you, fellow-
critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de tail! How you tink
to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk to ’em
gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat is
natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be
angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well goberned. Now, look
here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat
whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not
one shark dood right as toder to dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de
right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit
off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de scrouge to
help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’ each oder,
Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to such dam g’uttons
as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in de
sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for
eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his shrill
voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill your
dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand just where
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired
position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go back to
the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you, cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook, and don’t
know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another mouthful at the
last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the question. “Where were
you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what country you
were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You must go
home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning round to
depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak there,
and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take it, I
say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town, where you
doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his beloved
fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here, and tell me such a
dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb. “Where do you expect to go
to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question. Now
what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his whole air
and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed angel will come
and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch him
where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and keeping
it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are
dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets? Main-top,
eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where your
tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling
through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t get there,
except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a ticklish business,
but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us are in heaven yet. Drop
your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand,
and clap t’other a’top of your heart, when I’m giving my orders, cook. What!
that your heart, there?—that’s your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you
have it. Hold it there now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly
wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the
same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don’t you? Well,
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing. Hold
the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that done,
dish it; d’ye hear? And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish,
be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As
for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D’ye hear?
away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.—Avast heaving
again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if he ain’t
more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man, limping away;
with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like
Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so outlandish a
thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was
esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large prices there. Also,
that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome
reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises,
which, you remember, are a species of whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this
day considered fine eating. The meat is made into balls about the size of
billiard balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-
balls or veal balls. The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They
had a great porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all hands be
considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but when you come to
sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your
appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious. We all know how they
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda,
one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
being exceedingly juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain
Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling
vessel—that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps
of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among the
Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed, they greatly
resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam
housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh. They have such an eatable
look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding
richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the buffalo’s (which is
esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat. But the
spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is; like the transparent, half-
jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far
too rich to supply a substitute for butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a
method of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it. In
the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip
their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish. The
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are then
mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat
resembling calves’ head, which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every
one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
calves’ brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to
be able to tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with an
intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the saddest
sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an “Et
tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that
landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to
result, in some way, from the consideration before mentioned: _i.e._ that a
man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own
light. But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he
certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight take a
tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you
it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in
his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and
enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their
bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is adding
insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my civilized and
enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is that handle made
of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating? And what
do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose? With a feather of
the same fowl. And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only
within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
patronize nothing but steel pens.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary
toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general thing at
least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in. For
that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very soon completed; and
requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the common usage is to take in
all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send every one below to his hammock
till daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in
rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will not
answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the
moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little
more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In most other parts of the
ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound, their wondrous
voracity can be at times considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them
up with sharp whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity. But it was
not thus in the present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any
man unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those
sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these two mariners,
darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the
sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their
only vital part. But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought about
new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped,
not only at each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round,
and bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was this all.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures. A sort
of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and
bones, after what might be called the individual life had departed. Killed and
hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one of these sharks almost took poor
Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous
jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage, agonizingly
lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god
wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio professors
of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was turned into what
seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would have thought we were
offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous things
comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and which no single
man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top
and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a
ship’s deck. The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these
intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of
the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages
over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the
nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad, semicircular line is cut
round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crew striking
up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her
starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans
over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap is
heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged
semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as the blubber envelopes
the whale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it. For the
strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling
over and over in the water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels
off along the line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of
Starbuck and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and
higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass
then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass
sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him
headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called
a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows. Whereupon, this
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part is
still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is
all ready for lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while
the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the
other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents. And thus
the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both
whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen
coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin of the
whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and
learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is
only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you know
what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature’s skin
as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these
are no arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any
other dense enveloping layer from the whale’s body but that same blubber; and
the outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can
that be but the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and
soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts
and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I have several such dried
bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I said
before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant
to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I
am driving at here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance,
which, I admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak;
for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. But no
more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in
the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred
barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, or rather
weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths, and not the
entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be had of the enormousness
of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mere integument yields such a lake
of liquid as that. Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the
net weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among the
many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over obliquely crossed
and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array, something like
those in the finest Italian line engravings. But these marks do not seem to be
impressed upon the isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen
through it, as if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In
some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations. These
are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls
of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the present
connexion. By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in
particular, I was much struck with a plate representing the old Indian
characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Upper Mississippi. Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale
remains undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of
another thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his
flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of
numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect. I should
say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to
bear the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs—I
should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in
this particular. It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are
probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long pieces, called
blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or
counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and
skirting his extremity. It is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body,
that the whale is enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all
seas, times, and tides. What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those
shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True,
other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these,
be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are
refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as
a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the
whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his blood, and he dies. How wonderful
is it then—except after explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where,
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong individual
vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare virtue of interior
spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself after the whale! Do thou, too,
remain warm among ice. Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome
of St. Peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a
temperature of thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections, how
few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the whale!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it has
not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal. Slowly it floats
more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate
sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white
headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls,
augment the murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship
that hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the
fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all in pious
mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled. In life but
few of them would have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed
it; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce. Oh,
horrible vultureism of earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and
hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering
discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls,
nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white
spray heaving high against it; straightway the whale’s unharming corpse, with
trembling fingers is set down in the log— _shoals, rocks, and breakers
hereabouts: beware!_ And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place;
leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader
originally leaped there when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents;
there’s your utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate
survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering
in the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror to his
foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than the Cock-
Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body
of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a
scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced whale surgeons very much
pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck; on the
contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that very place, is
the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the surgeon must operate from
above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject, and
that subject almost hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes
tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical point
hard by its insertion into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s
boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till
the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted
on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a full grown leviathan this
is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head embraces nearly one third of his
entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that, even by the
immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing
a Dutch barn in jewellers’ scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head was
hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so that it
might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And there with the
strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward
drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like
a crane over the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s
waist like the giant Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to
their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted
deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more
unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his
cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the
side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb’s long
spade—still remaining there after the whale’s decapitation—and striking it
into the lower part of the half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-
wise under one arm, and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on
this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a
calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast and venerable
head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and
there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret
thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest. That head
upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of
millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most
familiar home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by
many a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when
heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the murdered mate when tossed by
pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of
the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift
lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous
husband to outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split
the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting himself,
while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That lively cry upon
this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way, and to
my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man! how far
beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallest atom stirs or
lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than the
ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads proved
her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and shooting by,
apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to
reach her. So the signal was set to see what response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships of the
American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which signals being
collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached, every
captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to
recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distances and with
no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting her
own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket. Squaring her
yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee, and lowered a boat;
it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck’s
order to accommodate the visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his
hand from his boat’s stern in token of that proceeding being entirely
unnecessary. It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on
board, and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s
company. For, though himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though
his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling
and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of
the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an interval of
some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s boat by the
occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she
heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large
rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon
skilfully brought to her proper bearings again. Subject to this, and other the
like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between the two
parties; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very
different sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all
totalities. He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face
with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. A long-skirted,
cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping
sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic
delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed—“That’s
he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho’s company told us of!”
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man
among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
everybody in the Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers,
where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having
several times descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the
speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but,
which, instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with
laudanum. A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway upon the
ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet. He
announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump
overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica. The
unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;—the dark, daring
play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors
of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority
of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they were
afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the
ship, especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous
captain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual’s
intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
forthwith opened all his seals and vials—devoting the ship and all hands to
unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out. So strongly
did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they
went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man
of them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. The
consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for
the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a
higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his
sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure. The
sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
a god. Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless
self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power of deceiving
and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that instant
a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the horrible
tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a succession of
riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas
were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged
about very violently, and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more
apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning
Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever
his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking a
whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick,
and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel
solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the
monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving
the Bible. But when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted
from the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and forewarnings, Macey
succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat. With them he pushed off;
and, after much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at
last succeeded in getting one iron fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
divinity. Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next instant,
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-
Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any. Sometimes,
nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated; oftener the boat’s bow
is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from
its place and accompanies the body. But strangest of all is the circumstance,
that in more instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a
single mark of violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from
the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!” Gabriel called off
the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale. This terrible
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only
making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced
to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless
terror to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him, that
the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt
the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which Ahab answered—“Aye.”
Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to his feet, glaring upon the old
man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger—“Think, think of
the blasphemer—dead, and down there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers, if I
mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
chance of encountering them in the four oceans. Thus, most letters never reach
their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three
years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely tumbled, damp,
and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequence of being kept in
a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a letter, Death himself might well have
been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but a dim
scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-
spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter
there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to
the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey, Ship
Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let me have
it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive
it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he caught it in the
slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the boat. But as he did so, the
oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards
the ship’s stern; so that, as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along
with Gabriel’s eager hand. He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-
knife, and impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab’s feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way
with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from
the Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the
whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, there is
much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands are wanted here,
and then again hands are wanted there. There is no staying in any one place;
for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere. It is much
the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene. We must now
retrace our way a little. It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
the whale’s back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there
cut by the spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as
that same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my particular
friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon the
monster’s back for the special purpose referred to. But in very many cases,
circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the
whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. The whale, be it observed,
lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer
flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass
revolves like a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg
figured in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to
observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar in his
boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him
while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale’s back. You have
seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord. Just so, from
the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is
technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of
canvas belted round his waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we proceed
further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends; fast to
Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow leather one. So that for
better or for worse, we two, for the time, were wedded; and should poor
Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usage and honor demanded, that
instead of cutting the cord, it should drag me down in his wake. So, then, an
elongated Siamese ligature united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin
brother; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
hempen bond entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then, that while
earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own
individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two; that my free
will had received a mortal wound; and that another’s mistake or misfortune
might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death. Therefore, I saw
that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity
never could have so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while
I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
threaten to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation
of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most
cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say that, by exceeding
caution, you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil
chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard. Nor could
I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the management of one end
of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and
the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant rolling and
swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night, the sharks now
freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow
from the carcass—the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them aside with
his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted
by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark
will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous
finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them. Accordingly,
besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from
too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he
was provided with still another protection. Suspended over the side in one of
the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple
of keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but in
their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that both he and
the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water, those
indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tail.
But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron
hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in and then
slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters it, after all? Are
you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes; those
spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad
pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now, as with
blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the
chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side; the
steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatory glance hands him—what?
Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and
water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near. “Yes, this
must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then standing as if
incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the astonished steward
slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel
you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what
the devil is ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer
matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer
this cup to our poor Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,” he
suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come from forward.
“Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it, if you please.” Then
watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the
face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the
whale. Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the
sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a harpooneer; none
of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye? You have got
out insurances on our lives and want to murder us all, and pocket the
proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger
on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits, but only this
ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to the
lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck. It is
the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of that
sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying, sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sort of
tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and was handed to
Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that was freely given to the
waves.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk over
Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s prodigious
head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it continue hanging there a
while till we can get a chance to attend to it. For the present other matters
press, and the best we can do now for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles
may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually drifted into
a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of
the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed
to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near. And though all hands
commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the
Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that
a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all,
the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if
opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further and further
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head. But
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and
soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast. An
interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged
right towards the ship by the towing whale. So close did the monster come to
the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going
down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared
from view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the ship
to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being brought
with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty of line yet in
the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of
rope, and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of
the ship. For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still plied
their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take them under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it
till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like
lightning along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging
off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water,
while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
that they performed a complete circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close flanking him
on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and
round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes of sharks that had
before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body, rushed to the fresh blood that was
spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at
the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he turned
upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in
other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued
between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said Stubb, not
without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a
leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow, “did
you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s head hoisted
on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale’s on the larboard;
did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he
seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think he’ll charm the
ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap, Stubb. Did you ever
notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a dark
night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look down there,
Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands—“Aye, will
I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise. Do you believe
that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship? He’s
the devil, I say. The reason why you don’t see his tail, is because he tucks
it up out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast
him! now that I think of it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes
of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve seen
him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye see,
in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and the
devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away his silver
watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then he’ll surrender Moby
Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I
tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship
once, switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring
if the old governor was at home. Well, he was at home, and asked the devil
what he wanted. The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’
‘What for?’ says the old governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the
devil, getting mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by
the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before he
got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the
whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask, when at
last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship,
“but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes? Did ye
read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me, Stubb, do
you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say
is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live for
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any parson a
wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can crawl into a porthole? Tell me
that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s the
figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string along in a
row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn’t begin to be
Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to
make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you meant
to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if he’s so old as
all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to live for ever, what
good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and drown
you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black eyes that
he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin again for a long
while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on
the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose
I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid of him, except the old governor who
daresn’t catch him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
people the devil kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now to
keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious going on,
I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look here, Beelzebub, you
don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I’ll make a grab into his
pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump—do you see; and then,
I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak
off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, where fluke
chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s
head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply leaned
over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads,
she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So,
when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on
the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw
all these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship,
the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece. But
nothing like this, in the present case, had been done. The carcases of both
whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a
mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever and anon
glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand. And Ahab
chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his shadow; while, if the
Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen
Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among
them, concerning all these passing things.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod’s
side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed,
were regularly gone through, even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or
Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and when the
proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to
the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several
others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I found it
strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid
part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid. A sweet and
unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite
cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious
molifier! After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion
at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly,
like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived
as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that
inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to
credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely free
from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I
myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-
laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules. Such an
abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-
humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze
ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very
milk and sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since by many
prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all cases man must
eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity; not
placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart,
the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the
visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his
hands in a jar of spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to
it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part
of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It is tough
with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some oil. After
being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable
oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like blocks of Berkshire
marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often
participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is a most
refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name imports, it is
of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden
ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple. It is plums of
rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself
from eating it. I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it. It
tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day
after the venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with
an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to
describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the whalemen,
and even so is the nature of the substance. It is an ineffably oozy, stringy
affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged
squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the dark,
glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right
whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt
that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary. But
as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s nipper is a short firm
strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan’s tail: it
averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is about the size of the iron
part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern
squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it
all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once to
descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates. This
place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces,
when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the proper time arrives for
cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros,
especially by night. On one side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left
clear for the workmen. They generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a
spade-man. The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the
same name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the
ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet
itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. This spade
is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he
stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If
he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very
much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-
mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass,
pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very
strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen there, lying along
lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous cistern in the whale’s huge
head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his
symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
that unaccountable cone,—longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in
diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And
an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an
idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the idol,
and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in
the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and with
bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a
dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt
of a boa. This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs
it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when
removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then
cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone
will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his
office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an
operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise
against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the
minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator’s desk. Arrayed in
decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a
candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by
her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry
joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship. It is as if from
the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most roomy
part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength, fitted to
sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet
by eight square, and five in height. The foundation does not penetrate the
deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous knees of
iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the
flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large,
sloping, battened hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
two in number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone and
sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the night-watches
some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil themselves away there
for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one man in each pot, side by
side—many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips. It
is a place also for profound mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand
try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I
was first indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all
bodies gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare masonry of
that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the furnaces,
directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of
iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to
the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire inclosed
surface of the works. By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept
replenished with water as fast as it evaporates. There are no external
chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a
moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were first
started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the works.”
This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting his shavings into
the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said that in a whaling voyage
the first fire in the try-works has to be fed for a time with wood. After that
no wood is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a
word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps
or fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These
fritters feed the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his
own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible to
inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live in it for
the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk
in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells like the left wing of the day of
judgment; it is an argument for the pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the carcase;
sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was
intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated every lofty rope
in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire. The burning ship drove on, as if
remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-
freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight
harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish
frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in
front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan
harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge pronged poles they
pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the
fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to
catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps. To every pitch
of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
to leap into their faces. Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here
lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of
the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny features,
now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the
contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they narrated to each
other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;
as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like the flames from
the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly
gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot
her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea and the night,
and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round
her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness,
seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently guided
the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness
myself, I but the better saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of
others. The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half in
smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so
soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would
come over me at a midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable) thing
occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly conscious
of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned
against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in
the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my
fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart. But,
spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it
seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then
made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression, that
whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven
ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered feeling, as of
death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the
crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had
turned myself about, and was fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her
prow and the compass. In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the
vessel from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad
and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night,
and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy hand on
the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first hint of the
hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its redness makes all
things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn will show in far
other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s accursed
Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of
griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side
of this earth, and which is two thirds of this earth. So, therefore, that
mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be
true—not true, or undeveloped. With books the same. The truest of all men was
the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes
is the fine hammered steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world
hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges
hospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk
of operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones,
and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” ( _i.e._ , even while living) “in the congregation
of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee, deaden
thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a
woe that is madness. And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can
alike dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and
become invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the
gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though
they soar.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s forecastle,
where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you would have
almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings
and counsellors. There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner
a chiselled muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens. To
dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet,
this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he
lives in light. He makes his berth an Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it;
so that in the pitchiest night the ship’s black hull still houses an
illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps—often but
old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at the try-works, and
replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He burns, too, the purest of
oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown
to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass
butter in April. He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
own supper of game.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from
the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the
valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on
the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
through the fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part
of the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding of
decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding along
beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the six-barrel
casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that
in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over, end
for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many
land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all
round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now,
_ex officio_ , every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great
hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go
the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the hatches are replaced,
and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in
all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream with freshets of blood
and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale’s head are
profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke
from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about
suffused with unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself;
while on all hands the din is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this self-
same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works, you would
all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously
neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing
virtue. This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just after
what they call an affair of oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps
of the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from
the back of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of
water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot is brushed from
the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which have been in use are
likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The great hatch is scrubbed and
placed upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combined and
simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this
conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to
their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to
the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out
the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not to taking tea by
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to such musked mariners of
oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity. They know not the
thing you distantly allude to. Away, and bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent on
spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil the old
oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot somewhere. Yes; and
many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know no
night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat,
where they have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they
only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and
cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew
by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to
cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the
poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by
the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to fight another whale, and go
through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing!
Yet this is life. For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from
this world’s vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary
patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in
clean tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when— _There she blows!_
—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two thousand
years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with thee along the
Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught thee, a green simple
boy, how to splice a rope!

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking
regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in the
multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been added how
that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood, he was wont to
pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely eyeing the particular
object before him. When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance
fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again
paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the
riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness,
only dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly attracted
by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as though now for the
first time beginning to interpret for himself in some monomaniac way whatever
significance might lurk in them. And some certain significance lurks in all
things, else all things are little worth, and the round world itself but an
empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart
of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters
of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of
iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
it last. For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live
to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun and
tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s disks and
stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving, are in luxuriant
profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems almost to derive an added
preciousness and enhancing glories, by passing through those fancy mints, so
Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of
these things. On its round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:
QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the
world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast
midway up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by
those letters you saw the likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame;
a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all other
grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as Lucifer. The firm
tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is
but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician’s glass, to each
and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains,
small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of a
former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born in throes,
’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must have left
their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning
against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read Belshazzar’s awful writing. I
have never marked the coin inspectingly. He goes below; let me read. A dark
valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the
Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us
round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon
and a hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but
if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer. Yet, oh,
the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some
sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! This coin speaks wisely,
mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will quit it, lest Truth shake me
falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s been
twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which
I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long. And all from looking
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s
Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere spending it. Humph! in my poor,
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer. I have seen doubloons before
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with
plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter
joes. What then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so
killing wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and as I
have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try my hand at
raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts
calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and wonders; and the sun, he’s
always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they are—here they go—all alive:—Aries,
or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the
Twins. Well; the sun he wheels among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just
crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do
to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts.
That’s my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and
Bowditch’s navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity
if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders! There’s a
clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon,
your zodiac here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I’ll read it
off, straight out of the book. Come, Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the
Ram—lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the
first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to
reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce
bites and surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!
that’s our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are
very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion,
stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all
round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself. As we pluck out the
shafts, stand aside! here’s the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full
tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with
Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven,
and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But
stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let’s
hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s before it; he’ll out with something
presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises a
certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this staring
been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at two cents the
cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t smoke dirty pipes like
Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine hundred and sixty of them; so here
goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a foolish
look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of wiseish look
to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old hearse-driver, he must
have been, that is, before he took to the sea. He luffs up before the
doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the mast; why, there’s a
horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he’s back again; what does that mean?
Hark! he’s muttering—voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and
listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun
stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know their marks;
they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen. Now,
in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right
opposite the gold. And what’s the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe
sign—the roaring and devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in one
kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all tattooing—looks
like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the Cannibal? As I live he’s
comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks the sun is in the thigh, or
in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s
Astronomy in the back country. And by Jove, he’s found something there in the
vicinity of his thigh—I guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t
know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some
king’s trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual. What
does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the sign and bows
himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper, depend upon it. Ho! more
and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would he had died, or I; he’s half
horrible to me. He too has been watching all of these interpreters—myself
included—and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand
away again and hear him. Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind, poor
fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a crow,
especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!
caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones
stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an
old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang myself. Any
way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand the rest, for they
have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my sanity. So, so, I leave him
muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to
unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence? Then again,
if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s nailed to the mast it’s
a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll
nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a
pine tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s
wedding ring. How did it get there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection,
when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious,
gold! the green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

### The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours, bearing down
under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who was
carelessly reclining in his own boat’s bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly,
good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty
arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s
surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it, he held
up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a
mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his crew were
dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger. But here a
curious difficulty presented itself. In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had
forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of
any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very
handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no
very easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea; for the
great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, and then
instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So, deprived of one leg,
and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly
invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to
attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward circumstance
that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap, almost
invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And in the present instance, all
this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship,
leaning over the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and
swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first
they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
cripple to use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a
minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing over the
cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. This was
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle. Soon he
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
capstan head. With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye,
hearty! let us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see the
White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards the
East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a telescope;
“there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from the
capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,” began the
Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time. Well, one day we
lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of them;
a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling round so,
that my boat’s crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the
outer gunwale. Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing
great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine— _my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well, this old
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not know; but
in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we
didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we
came plump on to his hump! instead of the other whale’s; that went off to
windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale
it was—the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to
capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the
hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw
(for I have a devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all
this, I say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped into
Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it. But,
Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I
was blind as a bat—both eyes out—all befogged and bedeadened with black
foam—the whale’s tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
like a marble steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes first, the
white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips. We all struck
out. To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish. But a
combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good
dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
towing along near me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his
shoulder); “yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s
flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the
barb ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my arm—came
out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there will tell you
the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon: Bunger, my lad,—the
captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all the time
standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly
rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers; and had thus far
been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a
pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the
ivory limbs of the two crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction
of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s
bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed captain,
addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat up with
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his
voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn’t see to
put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three
o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very
severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious
jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept
alive by any other man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to be
facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But I may as
well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that is to say, Jack
Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total abstinence man; I never
drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to him;
fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with the arm
story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing, sir,
before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my best and
severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was,
sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and
several inches long. I measured it with the lead line. In short, it grew
black; I knew what was threatened, and off it came. But I had no hand in
shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule”—pointing at it
with the marlingspike—“that is the captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the
carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock
some one’s brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into
diabolical passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but
which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with it. Oh,
you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another Bunger in the
watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you
should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we didn’t
see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I didn’t then know
what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till some time afterwards,
when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick—as some call him—and
then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without this
other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to get the
right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically bowing to each
Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of
the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man’s arm? And he knows
it too. So that what you take for the White Whale’s malice is only his
awkwardness. For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
terrify by feints. But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly
a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once
upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small
tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
incorporate it into his general bodily system. Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are
quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case the arm is
yours; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the arm he
has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once, and that has satisfied
me. There would be great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a
ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he’s best let alone; don’t
you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let alone,
that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a magnet! How
long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly walking
round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s blood—bring the
thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes these planks
beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat! Which
way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put. “What’s
the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain crazy?” whispering
Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to take the
boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle towards him,
commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men were
springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him. With back to
the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright
till alongside of the Pequod.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild, pleasant
weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on the stretch, they
were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the
whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their
uprising; though with but small success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow heaving
swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so sociably mixing
with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone cats they purr against
the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the
tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger
heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this
velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain
filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he regards it as so
much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts,
seems struggling forward, not through high rolling waves, but through the tall
grass of a rolling prairie: as when the western emigrants’ horses only show
their erected ears, while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing
verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there
steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie
sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the
woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact
and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary
an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his
own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but
tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye, men yet
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them. Would to God these
blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm. There is no
steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
gradations, and at the last one pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell,
boyhood’s thoughtless faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of
If. But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
and men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never
weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like those
orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that same
golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s eye!—Tell me
not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways. Let faith
oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same golden
light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has
always been jolly!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before
the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask
of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday
apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among
the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for
home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at
their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and
hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last
whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying
from her rigging, on every side. Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed
tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you
saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
was a brazen lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most surprising
success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas
numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the
far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered
for, from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in
the captain’s and officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the forecastle, the
sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was
humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and
filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them;
that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons
pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent
testimony of his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian
sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a
crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered
with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a
loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-
deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had
eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented
boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding
over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s company were
tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots
had been removed. You would have almost thought they were pulling down the
cursed Bastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and
mortar were being hurled into the sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship’s
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a
stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s wakes—one all
jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to
come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast
of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting a
glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the other good-
humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come along, will
ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art a full
ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an empty ship, and
outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward there! Set all sail,
and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the
Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor;
but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they
were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound
craft, he took from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the
ship to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites sail
close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the rushing
breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed it with the
Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and
four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight
were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sun and whale both
stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such plaintiveness, such
inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it almost seemed as if
far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish
land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these
vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off
from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil
boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying—the
turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that strange spectacle, beheld
of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown
before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-
rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too worships
fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh that these too-
favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights. Look! here, far water-
locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and
impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long
Chinese ages, the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as
stars that shine upon the Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies
sunwards full of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
corpse, and it heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded thy
separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas; thou art an
infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering
Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor has this thy whale
sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to
me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed
jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In vain, oh whale, dost
thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun, that only calls forth
life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a
prouder, if a darker faith. All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me
here; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water
now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl
finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and
valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to windward;
one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These last three were
brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached
till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and
that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and the
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black,
glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which gently chafed the
whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching in
the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round the whale, and
tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A sound like the moaning in
squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering
through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and hooped
round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world.
“I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can
be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses
must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands;
and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes floating over
the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a sight we shall not
soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can follow,
thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so? Well, then,
did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two pledges that I shall
yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like
fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried Ahab,
with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the slumbering
crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead whale was brought to
the ship.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab, coming
from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to the
braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the
nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s prow for the
equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab,
seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily
observation of the sun to determine his latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are
none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the
insufferable splendors of God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was
furnished with coloured glasses, through which to take sight of that solar
fire. So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck, and with face thrown up like
Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
passionlessness. At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
that precise instant. Then falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up
towards the sun and murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty
Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I _am_ —but canst thou cast the least hint
where I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,
and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the
unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its numerous
cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered: “Foolish toy!
babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores, and Captains; the world
brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do, but
tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide
planet, and the hand that holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not
tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and
yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain
toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched
with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon are the glances
of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to
gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no
longer will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the
level dead-reckoning, by log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show
me my place on the sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
and destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead
feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a fatalistic despair
that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee’s
face. Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect of
their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab,
troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her
heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long,
ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s tumultuous
way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of thine, what will at
length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck—sea-coal,
not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, ‘Here some one
thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play
them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the
game, and die in it!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in
spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most effulgent but basket the
deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
northern lands. So, too, it is, that in these resplendent Japanese seas the
mariner encounters the direst of all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes
burst from out that cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and
sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled
was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead. When darkness
came on, sky and sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the
lightning, that showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with the
rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every flash
of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might have
befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the
men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats. But all their
pains seemed naught. Though lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward
quarter boat (Ahab’s) did not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up
against the reeling ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at
the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck, “but the
sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You see, Mr. Starbuck,
a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the world it
runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me, all the start I have to meet
it, is just across the deck here. But never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old
song says;”—( _sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,  
And a joker is the whale,  
A’ flourishin’ his tail,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
The scud all a flyin’,  
That’s his flip only foamin’;  
When he stirs in the spicin’,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  
  
Thunder splits the ships,  
But he only smacks his lips,  
A tastin’ of this flip,—  
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  

“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here
in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward; and I
sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there’s
no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat. And when that’s
done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never mind
how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand
towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes from the
eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the very course he
swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where is that stove? In the
stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his stand-point is stove, man!
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,”
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s question. “The gale that
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive
us towards home. Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but to
leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following the
flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same instant a
volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-
hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of
fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry
to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But as this conductor
must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all contact with
the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable
to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging,
and more or less impeding the vessel’s way in the water; because of all this,
the lower parts of a ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are
generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up
into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to
vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to
light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them over, fore and aft.
Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the
world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-
pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of the three
tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic
wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing sea
heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently jammed his
hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping backward on the
deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone
he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of the
calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses from the
topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my
voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God’s burning finger has
been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin” has been woven
into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all their
eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of
stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo,
loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which
the thunder had come. The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white
teeth, which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like
Satanic blue flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the
Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment or two
passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. It was Stubb.
“What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the
song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have they no
bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark to look. Hear
me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for
those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a’ block with
sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning to
glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once more the
high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness
in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the
Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away from him;
while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just
been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare,
now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a
drooping, orchard twig. In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
deck; but all their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white flame but
lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast links there; I would
fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did
worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I
bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy
right worship is defiance. To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed. No fearless fool
now fronts thee. I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp
of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in
me. In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there’s that in here
that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[ _Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his right
hand pressed hard upon them._ ]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung from
me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the homage of these poor
eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The lightning flashes through my
skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded,
and rolling on some stunning ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to
thee. Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
leaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see,
or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not. Oh,
cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but thine is
greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten;
certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun. I know
that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent. There is
some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical. Through thee, thy
flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou
hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated
grief. Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick
the sky! I leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
defyingly I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed in its
conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s bow; but the
sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off;
and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked
fire. As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck
grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an
ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,
old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than
this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast mate’s
thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But dashing the
rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab
waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix with it the first
sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end. Petrified by his aspect, and still
more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart,
soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye may know to
what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!” And
with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of some
lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it so much the
more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts; so at those
last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of
dismay.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working loose and
the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises, but it
has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By masts and
keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack. Send
down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for
wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in
tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e’en take it for sublime,
did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take
medicine!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the
anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but you will
never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how long ago is it
since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say that whatever ship Ahab
sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy, just
as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers
forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that time,
why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder barrels aft
and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this
drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you
couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re Aquarius, or the water-bearer,
Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat collar. Don’t you see, then, that for
these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here
are hydrants, Flask. But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can
pass the rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a
mast’s lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you timber-head, that
no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no more danger then, in my poor
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why,
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why don’t ye be
sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye, then? any man with
half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the turn there, and
pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were
never going to be used again. Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like
tying a man’s hands behind him. And what big generous hands they are, to be
sure. These are your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,
Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an
uncommon long cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So;
next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say, just
wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at long-togs so,
Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all
storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and
drive down a beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard;
Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly! This
is a nasty night, lad.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.— _Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s the
use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum; give us a
glass of rum. Um, um, um!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s jaw-
bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached to it—for
they were slack—because some play to the tiller was indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the
blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses, at
intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the Pequod’s; at almost every
shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which
they revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold
without some sort of unwonted emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the other
aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a storm-
trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through the water with
some precision again; and the course—for the present, East-south-east—which he
was to steer, if practicable, was once more given to the helmsman. For during
the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching
the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern;
aye, the foul breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “ _Ho! the fair wind!
oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_ ” the crew singing for joy, that so promising an event
should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report immediately,
and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in the affairs of
the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze—however
reluctantly and gloomily,—than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain
Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning fitfully, and
casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a thin one, with fixed
blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The isolated subterraneousness of
the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped
round by all the roar of the elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were
shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that
instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but
so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very musket that
he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me touch it—lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I
should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye, aye; and powder in the
pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll cure myself of this. I’ll hold
the musket boldly while I think.—I come to report a fair wind to him. But how
fair? Fair for death and doom,— _that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind
that’s only fair for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the
very one; _this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
thing I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly
quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead
reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man be
tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s company down to doom with him?—Yes, it
would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come
to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if
Ahab have his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would
not be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there, he’s
sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I can’t
withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty
wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat obedience to thy own flat
commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy
vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs. Great God forbid!—But is there no other way?
no lawful way?—Make him a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this
old man’s living power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained
down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me on the
long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues
away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is
heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,
tindering sheets and skin together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and
slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s
end against the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A touch, and
Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh Mary! Mary!—boy! boy!
boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man, who can tell to what unsounded
deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may sink, with all the crew! Great God,
where art Thou? Shall I? shall I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the
fore and main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s tormented
sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he placed
the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him. I
must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty
bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on like giants’
palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before the wind. Muffled
in the full morning light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread
intensity of his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over
everything. The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the
tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the
bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the
stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward place, and how the same
yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the
sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye! Yoke on the
further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards the helm,
huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this hour
in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then observed by
Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very blinding
palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the
compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to
stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses
pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old man
with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened before. Mr.
Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s all. Thou hast
before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than one
case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as developed in
the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one with the electricity
beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things
should be. Instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as
to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so
that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting
needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even
were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took the
precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were exactly
inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be changed
accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair one had only been
juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but
quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and Flask—who in some
small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings—likewise unmurmuringly
acquiesced. As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of
Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan
harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only
with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But chancing to
slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the
quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked thee, and
to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But Ahab is lord over
the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and
the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles. Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do,
were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to revive the
spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous
as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old man well knew that to
steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to
be passed over by superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil
portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the
things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s needles; but
out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true
as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow. But
Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance,
and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade him hold it
upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the maul, after repeatedly
smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise
on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate
still holding the rod as before. Then going through some small strange motions
with it—whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen
thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles
there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering and
vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who
had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the
binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,—“Look ye, for
yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, and
that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his fatal
pride.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log and
line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance upon other
means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same
time, and frequently more for form’s sake than anything else, regularly
putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well
as the presumed average rate of progression every hour. It had been thus with
the Pequod. The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched,
just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it;
sun and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he
remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about
the level log and line. The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman. “Take the
reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the deck,
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting handle-
ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so stood with the
angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to
form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old Manxman, who was
intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have spoiled
it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee? Thou
seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey hairs of
mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a superior, who’ll ne’er
confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s granite-
founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man from
Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man; which is
sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring
heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In turn,
jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of
the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log
was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea
parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up,
Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the
line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in, Tahitian! These
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow. Ha, Pip?
come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing. Let’s
see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags hard; I guess
he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off—we
haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on
board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm. “Away
from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing. “Hands
off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy
eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One hundred
pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks cowardly—quickest known by
that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens! look down
here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative
libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s home henceforth, while Ahab
lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven
of my heart-strings. Come, let’s down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s hand, and
feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps
he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope; something that
weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth now come and rivet these two
hands together; the black one with the white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness,
and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering
man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full of the
sweet things of love and gratitude. Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy
black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the rotten
line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a new line
altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress solely
determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her path towards
the Equator. Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters,
descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm things
preluding some riotous and desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn,
was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then headed by Flask—was
startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly—like half-articulated
wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s murdered Innocents—that one and all,
they started from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or
sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while
that wild cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained
unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of all—declared that the
wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in
the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he came
to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not unaccompanied with
hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of
seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams that had
lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her,
crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. But this only the more
affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very superstitious
feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones when in
distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-
intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the
sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At sun-rise this
man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and whether it was
that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors sometimes go aloft
in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man, there is now no
telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at his perch, when a cry
was heard—a cry and a rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in
the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
of the sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it always
hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun
having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and
that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound
cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though
in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man was swallowed
up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time. Indeed, in some
sort, they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent; for they
regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the
fulfilment of an evil already presaged. They declared that now they knew the
reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before. But again the
old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
ship’s stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can arrange
it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a melancholy
pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin, I mean. Dost thou
hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand as with
a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and no
more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks. Now I
don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he wears it like a
gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he won’t put his head into
it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin? And now I’m ordered
to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like turning an old coat; going to bring the
flesh on the other side now. I don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I
don’t like it at all; it’s undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats
do tinkerings; we are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at the
conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle, and at the
beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers. I know an old woman of
sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the
reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my
job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads
to run off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship’s
stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some superstitious old
carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don’t budge. Cruppered with a
coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind. We workers in
woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the
why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then
we stash it if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any way,
I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three feet long
hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down, there’ll be thirty
lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often
beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!
Let’s to it.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the open
hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakum slowly
unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock.—Ahab comes
slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand complies
with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a church! What’s
here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but they’ve
set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a jack-of-all-
trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin? The
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none
in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in all
things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And yet, a
coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter. Hast thou ever
helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate,
going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all, sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself? Look at
thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the
Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old
man, too, right in his middle. He’s always under the Line—fiery hot, I tell
ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum; quick. Here we go again. This wooden
mallet is the cork, and I’m the professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

( _Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing rests on
two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that fellow. Rat-tat!
So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all materials! What things real
are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here now’s the very dreaded symbol of
grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of
most endangered life. A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be
that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-
preserver! I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of
earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again. Now, then,
Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon
the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time the Pequod
was making good speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward
stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank
bladders that are burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could
hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question; and
would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captain himself,
having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending her side. A few keen
pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang
to the deck. Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing. “How
was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, while three
of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of whales, which had led
them some four or five miles from the ship; and while they were yet in swift
chase to windward, the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up
out of the water, not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a
reserved one—had been instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the
wind, this fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything
about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was
concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his
pursuers, as often happens. There was some apprehension, but no positive
alarm, as yet. The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats—ere going in quest
of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only
been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for
the time, to increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the missing
boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft
on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to
gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though she then
paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding
anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though
she had thus continued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the
missing keel had been seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object
in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his own in the
search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel
lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one in that
missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his watch—he’s so
cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships
cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?
See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in the very buttons of his
eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I conjure”—here
exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but icily received
his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship—I will
gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if there be no other way—for eight-
and-forty hours only—only that—you must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this
thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the coat and
watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx sailor
standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s the
more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the Captain’s
sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among the number of the
other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the other hand, separated from
the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still
another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s
instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such
emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats,
always to pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till
forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy; a
little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had thus early sought
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
the destiny of all his race. Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
three or four years’ voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
first knowledge of a whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance
display of a father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue
apprehensiveness and concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab; and
Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without the least
quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me as you
would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a boy, Captain
Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a child of your old
age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men, now, and stand by to
square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that prolongingly
moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it. Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself, but I must
go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this
present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the
ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin, leaving the
strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so
earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to
the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in
view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot, however
small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung round; starboard and
larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it
pushed her before it; while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly
clustered with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw that
this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort. She was
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

( _Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._ )

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is coming when
Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee by him. There is
that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my malady. Like cures like;
and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health. Do thou abide
below here, where they shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain. Aye,
lad, thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou
must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one
lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity
of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like applies to him
too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose drowned
bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin. But I will
never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him. I tell
thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad. Listen,
and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know that I am
there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art thou, lad, as the
circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless thee; and if it come to
that,—God for ever save thee, let what will befall.”

( _Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._ )

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now were even
poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the door. What? neither lock,
nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening it. It must be the spell; he
told me to stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine. Here,
then, I’ll seat me, against the transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her
keel and her three masts before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets
all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,
monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host to white men with
gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?—a little negro
lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat
once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame
upon all cowards! I name no names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the
table. Shame upon all cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master!
master! I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay,
though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”

  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have chased
his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there; now, that he
found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting
wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very
day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;—and now that all his
successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the
demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old
man’s eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now fixedly
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It domineered
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to
hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old man’s
despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when he
thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that even as
Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance awed his; or
somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it. Such an added,
gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless
shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as
it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous
shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being’s body. And that shadow was
always hovering there. For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly
been known to slumber, or go below. He would stand still for hours: but never
sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never
rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck,
unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly
pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the main-mast and the mizen;
or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced
upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that
however motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they
could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed
at times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he
stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded
night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat. The
clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s sunshine dried upon him; and
so, day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all
gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at
naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But though his whole life
was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee’s mystic watch was
without intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak—one man
to the other—unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
necessary. Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
concerned the slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours,
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly, and every
instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab seemed an independent
lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both seemed yoked together, and an
unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib. For be this
Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from
aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after sunset and
after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman’s
bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the children-seeking
Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac old man seemed
distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly all except the Pagan
harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not
willingly overlook the sight he sought. But if these suspicions were really
his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab must
have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed
bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to
the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
fasten it at the rail. This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
said,—“Take the rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch,
Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near
it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad
upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead, astern, this side, and that,—within
the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the
rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up
to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these circumstances, its
fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has
the special watch of it. Because in such a wilderness of running rigging,
whose various different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are
being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a
natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping
to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only
strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man
who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
approaching to decision—one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out
he had seemed to doubt somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he
should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an
otherwise distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten minutes;
one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously
close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes; one of these
birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably
swift circlings. Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air; then
spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed not to
mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it much, it
being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed
to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being
posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat
lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long hooked bill
at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace it, and
thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome. But
only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good. Ahab’s hat was
never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the
prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a
minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the
sea.


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the solitary
night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the daylight look-
outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that’s all. Helm there;
steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. What a lovely day again! were it a
new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the angels, and this morning
the first of its throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that
world. Here’s food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks;
he only feels, feels, feels; _that’s_ tingling enough for mortal man! to
think’s audacity. God only has that right and privilege. Thinking is, or ought
to be, a coolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor
brains beat too much for that. And yet, I’ve sometimes thought my brain was
very calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
contents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is growing now;
this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like that sort of
common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy clefts of Greenland
ice or in Vesuvius lava. How the wild winds blow it; they whip it about me as
the torn shreds of split sails lash the tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind
that has no doubt blown ere this through prison corridors and cells, and wards
of hospitals, and ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as
fleeces. Out upon it!—it’s tainted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such
a wicked, miserable world. I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink there. And
yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever conquered it? In every
fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run tilting at it, and you but run
through it. Ha! a coward wind that strikes stark naked men, but will not stand
to receive a single blow. Even Ahab is a braver thing—a nobler thing than
_that_. Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that most
exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only
bodiless as objects, not as agents. There’s a most special, a most cunning,
oh, a most malicious difference! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s something all glorious and gracious in the wind. These warm Trade
Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in strong and
steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark, however the baser
currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiest Mississippies of the land
swift and swerve about, uncertain where to go at last. And by the eternal
Poles! these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on; these Trades,
or something like them—something so unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my
keeled soul along! To it! Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See the sun! Aye,
aye, it must be so. I’ve oversailed him. How, got the start? Aye, he’s chasing
_me_ now; not I, _him_ —that’s bad; I might have known it, too. Fool! the
lines—the harpoons he’s towing. Aye, aye, I have run him by last night. About!
about! Come down, all of ye, but the regular look outs! Man the braces!”

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod’s quarter,
so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced ship sailed
hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God keep us,
but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside wet my flesh. I
misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket. “We
should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straightway Starbuck did Ahab’s bidding, and once more
Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time itself now held long
breaths with keen suspense. But at last, some three points off the weather
bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the three mast-heads
three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it.

“Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far off to
lower yet, Mr. Starbuck. The sails shake! Stand over that helmsman with a top-
maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But let me have one more good
round look aloft here at the sea; there’s time for that. An old, old sight,
and yet somehow so young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it, a
boy, from the sand-hills of Nantucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as
to me. There’s a soft shower to leeward. Such lovely leewardings! They must
lead somewhere—to something else than common land, more palmy than the palms.
Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then; the better if
the bitterer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old mast-head! What’s
this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks. No such green weather
stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the difference now between man’s old age and
matter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in our hulls,
though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead
wood has the better of my live flesh every way. I can’t compare with it; and
I’ve known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the
most vital stuff of vital fathers. What’s that he said? he should still go
before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and all night
I’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye, aye, like many more
thou told’st direful truth as touching thyself, O Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy
shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep a good eye upon the whale, the while
I’m gone. We’ll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down
there, tied by head and tail.”

He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered through the
cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop’s stern,
Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the mate,—who
held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing, Starbuck!”

“Truth, sir: saddest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a billow that’s all one crested comb, Starbuck. I
am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my captain, my captain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a brave man
that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by the
crew!”

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-window there; “O
master, my master, come back!”

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the boat
leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when numbers
of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the hull,
maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time they dipped in the
water; and in this way accompanied the boat with their bites. It is a thing
not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks
at times apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures
hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east. But these were the
first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had
been first descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such tiger-
yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the
sharks—a matter sometimes well known to affect them,—however it was, they
seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others.

“Heart of wrought steel!” murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
following with his eyes the receding boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly to that
sight?—lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by them, open-
mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third day?—For when three days
flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be sure the first is the
morning, the second the noon, and the third the evening and the end of that
thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through
me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant,—fixed at the top of a
shudder! Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all
the past is somehow grown dim. Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind
me; boy! I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. Strangest problems of
life seem clearing; but clouds sweep between—Is my journey’s end coming? My
legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats it
yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!—stave it off—move, move! speak aloud!—Mast-head
there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft there!—keep thy keenest
eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho! again!—drive off that hawk! see!
he pecks—he tears the vane”—pointing to the red flag flying at the main-
truck—“Ha! he soars away with it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that
sight, oh Ahab!—shudder, shudder!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads—a
downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but intending to
be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a little sideways from the
vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-
beat waves hammered and hammered against the opposing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads drive them
in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and no hearse can be
mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then quickly
upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice, swiftly rising
to the surface. A low rumbling sound was heard; a subterraneous hum; and then
all held their breaths; as bedraggled with trailing ropes, and harpoons, and
lances, a vast form shot lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea. Shrouded in a
thin drooping veil of mist, it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and
then fell swamping back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters
flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower
of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble
trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to the
attack; but maddened by yesterday’s fresh irons that corroded in him, Moby
Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven. The
wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead, beneath
the transparent skin, looked knitted together; as head on, he came churning
his tail among the boats; and once more flailed them apart; spilling out the
irons and lances from the two mates’ boats, and dashing in one side of the
upper part of their bows, but leaving Ahab’s almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the whale
swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he shot by them
again; at that moment a quick cry went up. Lashed round and round to the
fish’s back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which, during the past night,
the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him, the half torn
body of the Parsee was seen; his sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended
eyes turned full upon old Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

“Befooled, befooled!”—drawing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see thee
again.—Aye, and thou goest before; and this, _this_ then is the hearse that
thou didst promise. But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word. Where is
the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those boats are useless now;
repair them if ye can in time, and return to me; if not, Ahab is enough to
die—Down, men! the first thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand
in, that thing I harpoon. Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and
so obey me.—Where’s the whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the corpse
he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter had been but a
stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again steadily swimming
forward; and had almost passed the ship,—which thus far had been sailing in
the contrary direction to him, though for the present her headway had been
stopped. He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent upon
pursuing his own straight path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Starbuck, “not too late is it, even now, the third day, to
desist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that madly seekest
him!”

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled to
leeward, by both oars and canvas. And at last when Ahab was sliding by the
vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck’s face as he leaned over
the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and follow him, not too
swiftly, at a judicious interval. Glancing upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg,
and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were
rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side,
and were busily at work in repairing them. One after the other, through the
port-holes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask,
busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw
all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers
seemed driving a nail into his heart. But he rallied. And now marking that the
vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had
just gained that perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and
nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ running chase, and the resistance to his
swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some latent
deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White Whale’s way now
began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more;
though indeed the whale’s last start had not been so long a one as before. And
still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and
so pertinaciously stuck to the boat; and so continually bit at the plying
oars, that the blades became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in
the sea, at almost every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars. Pull on! ’tis
the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he muttered—“whether
these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all
alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the helm! let me pass,”—and so saying
two of the oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with the
White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance—as the whale
sometimes will—and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist, which,
thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled round his great, Monadnock hump; he
was even thus close to him; when, with body arched back, and both arms
lengthwise high-lifted to the poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far
fiercer curse into the hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the
socket, as if sucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically
rolled his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated part of
the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have been tossed into
the sea. As it was, three of the oarsmen—who foreknew not the precise instant
of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for its effects—these were flung
out; but so fell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again,
and rising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard
again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and
swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated, instantaneous
swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering sea. But when Ahab
cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line, and hold it so;
and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats, and tow the boat up to
the mark; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug, it
snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars! Burst in
upon him!”

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled round
to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution, catching sight of
the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing in it the source of all
his persecutions; bethinking it—it may be—a larger and nobler foe; of a
sudden, he bore down upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery
showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. “I grow blind; hands! stretch out
before me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oarsmen.

“Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for ever too
late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I see: the ship! the
ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the sledge-hammering
seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks burst through, and in an
instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves;
its half-wading, splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the
pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego’s mast-head hammer remained
suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as with a plaid,
then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own forward-flowing heart;
while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the bowsprit beneath, caught sight of
the down-coming monster just as soon as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of air, now
hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a woman’s fainting fit.
Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is this the end of all my bursting
prayers? all my life-long fidelities? Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady!
helmsman, steady. Nay, nay! Up helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his
unappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot
depart. My God, stand by me now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now help
Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Who
ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own unwinking eye? And now
poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is all too soft; would it were
stuffed with brushwood! I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun,
moon, and stars! I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up
his ghost. For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand
the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of
gulping soon! Why fly ye not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let
Stubb die in his drawers! A most mouldy and over salted death,
though;—cherries! cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we
die!”

“Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope my poor
mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will now come to her,
for the voyage is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers, bits
of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their hands, just as
they had darted from their various employments; all their enchanted eyes
intent upon the whale, which from side to side strangely vibrating his
predestinating head, sent a broad band of overspreading semicircular foam
before him as he rushed. Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in
his whole aspect, and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solid white
buttress of his forehead smote the ship’s starboard bow, till men and timbers
reeled. Some fell flat upon their faces. Like dislodged trucks, the heads of
the harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach, they
heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat; “its wood
could only be American!”

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its keel; but
turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far off the other bow,
but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a time, he lay quiescent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy hammer. Oh!
ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel; and only god-
bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and Pole-pointed prow,—death-
glorious ship! must ye then perish, and without me? Am I cut off from the last
fond pride of meanest shipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life!
Oh, now I feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief. Ho, ho! from all
your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll, thou
all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with thee; from
hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last breath at thee.
Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool! and since neither can be
mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to
thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_ , I give up the spear!”

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to clear it;
he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the neck, and
voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was shot out of the
boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the
rope’s final end flew out of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and
smiting the sea, disappeared in its depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The ship?
Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, bewildering mediums saw
her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous Fata Morgana; only the
uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or
fate, to their once lofty perches, the pagan harpooneers still maintained
their sinking lookouts on the sea. And now, concentric circles seized the lone
boat itself, and all its crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole,
and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex,
carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the sunken head
of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the erect spar yet
visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag, which calmly
undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying billows they almost
touched;—at that instant, a red arm and a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted
in the open air, in the act of nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the
subsiding spar. A sky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck
downwards from its natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag, and
incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept its broad
fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling
that etherial thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept
his hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks,
and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the
flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink to
hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, and helmeted
herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen white surf
beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the great shroud of the
sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.

  
  
  
  

## Epilogue

### “AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Because one did
survive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s disappearance, I was he whom the Fates
ordained to take the place of Ahab’s bowsman, when that bowsman assumed the
vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three men were tossed
from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern. So, floating on the margin
of the ensuing scene, and in full sight of it, when the halfspent suction of
the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing
vortex. When I reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool. Round and round,
then, and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of
that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining
that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason
of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with great
force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over, and
floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost one whole day and
night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The unharming sharks, they
glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed
with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and picked
me up at last. It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing
search after her missing children, only found another orphan.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY-DICK; OR THE WHALE ***

This file should be named 2701-h.htm or 2701-h.zip

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/2701/

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT
GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms
of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not
protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE  
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE  
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution
of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to
comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available
with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms
of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If
you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease
using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to
whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with
most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full
terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things
you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of
this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the
public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by
copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States,
we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all
references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will
support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the
work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this
work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what
you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your
country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading,
copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works
based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes
no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any
copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is
associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

> This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
> other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
> whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
> the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
> [www.gutenberg.org](https://www.gutenberg.org). If you are not located in
> the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you
> are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from
texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice
indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the
work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without
paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with
both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the
copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™
License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found
at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other
work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently
displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing
or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a
Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™
website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla
ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project
Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with
paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of
Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to
calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this
paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty
payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare
(or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
“Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in
writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to
the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user
to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project
Gutenberg™ works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money
paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is
discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of
Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in
this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort
to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on
which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or
other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other
medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark,
and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under
this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses,
including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE,
STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK
OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN
IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in
this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the
person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person
or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without
further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the
maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The
invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not
void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all
liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a)
distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration,
modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and
(c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts
of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project
Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3)
educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi
and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake
City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public
support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-
readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to
maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities
and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much
paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not
solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation
of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit
[www.gutenberg.org/donate](https://www.gutenberg.org/donate/).

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not
met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting
unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers
to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and
addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks,
online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
www.gutenberg.org/donate


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the solitary
night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the daylight look-
outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that’s all. Helm there;
steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. What a lovely day again! were it a
new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the angels, and this morning
the first of its throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that
world. Here’s food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks;
he only feels, feels, feels; _that’s_ tingling enough for mortal man! to
think’s audacity. God only has that right and privilege. Thinking is, or ought
to be, a coolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor
brains beat too much for that. And yet, I’ve sometimes thought my brain was
very calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
contents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is growing now;
this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like that sort of
common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy clefts of Greenland
ice or in Vesuvius lava. How the wild winds blow it; they whip it about me as
the torn shreds of split sails lash the tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind
that has no doubt blown ere this through prison corridors and cells, and wards
of hospitals, and ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as
fleeces. Out upon it!—it’s tainted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such
a wicked, miserable world. I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink there. And
yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever conquered it? In every
fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run tilting at it, and you but run
through it. Ha! a coward wind that strikes stark naked men, but will not stand
to receive a single blow. Even Ahab is a braver thing—a nobler thing than
_that_. Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that most
exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only
bodiless as objects, not as agents. There’s a most special, a most cunning,
oh, a most malicious difference! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s something all glorious and gracious in the wind. These warm Trade
Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in strong and
steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark, however the baser
currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiest Mississippies of the land
swift and swerve about, uncertain where to go at last. And by the eternal
Poles! these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on; these Trades,
or something like them—something so unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my
keeled soul along! To it! Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See the sun! Aye,
aye, it must be so. I’ve oversailed him. How, got the start? Aye, he’s chasing
_me_ now; not I, _him_ —that’s bad; I might have known it, too. Fool! the
lines—the harpoons he’s towing. Aye, aye, I have run him by last night. About!
about! Come down, all of ye, but the regular look outs! Man the braces!”

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod’s quarter,
so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced ship sailed
hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God keep us,
but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside wet my flesh. I
misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket. “We
should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straightway Starbuck did Ahab’s bidding, and once more
Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time itself now held long
breaths with keen suspense. But at last, some three points off the weather
bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the three mast-heads
three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it.

“Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far off to
lower yet, Mr. Starbuck. The sails shake! Stand over that helmsman with a top-
maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But let me have one more good
round look aloft here at the sea; there’s time for that. An old, old sight,
and yet somehow so young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it, a
boy, from the sand-hills of Nantucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as
to me. There’s a soft shower to leeward. Such lovely leewardings! They must
lead somewhere—to something else than common land, more palmy than the palms.
Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then; the better if
the bitterer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old mast-head! What’s
this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks. No such green weather
stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the difference now between man’s old age and
matter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in our hulls,
though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead
wood has the better of my live flesh every way. I can’t compare with it; and
I’ve known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the
most vital stuff of vital fathers. What’s that he said? he should still go
before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and all night
I’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye, aye, like many more
thou told’st direful truth as touching thyself, O Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy
shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep a good eye upon the whale, the while
I’m gone. We’ll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down
there, tied by head and tail.”

He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered through the
cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop’s stern,
Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the mate,—who
held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing, Starbuck!”

“Truth, sir: saddest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a billow that’s all one crested comb, Starbuck. I
am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my captain, my captain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a brave man
that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by the
crew!”

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-window there; “O
master, my master, come back!”

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the boat
leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when numbers
of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the hull,
maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time they dipped in the
water; and in this way accompanied the boat with their bites. It is a thing
not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks
at times apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures
hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east. But these were the
first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had
been first descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such tiger-
yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the
sharks—a matter sometimes well known to affect them,—however it was, they
seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others.

“Heart of wrought steel!” murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
following with his eyes the receding boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly to that
sight?—lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by them, open-
mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third day?—For when three days
flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be sure the first is the
morning, the second the noon, and the third the evening and the end of that
thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through
me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant,—fixed at the top of a
shudder! Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all
the past is somehow grown dim. Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind
me; boy! I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. Strangest problems of
life seem clearing; but clouds sweep between—Is my journey’s end coming? My
legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats it
yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!—stave it off—move, move! speak aloud!—Mast-head
there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft there!—keep thy keenest
eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho! again!—drive off that hawk! see!
he pecks—he tears the vane”—pointing to the red flag flying at the main-
truck—“Ha! he soars away with it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that
sight, oh Ahab!—shudder, shudder!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads—a
downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but intending to
be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a little sideways from the
vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-
beat waves hammered and hammered against the opposing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads drive them
in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and no hearse can be
mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then quickly
upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice, swiftly rising
to the surface. A low rumbling sound was heard; a subterraneous hum; and then
all held their breaths; as bedraggled with trailing ropes, and harpoons, and
lances, a vast form shot lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea. Shrouded in a
thin drooping veil of mist, it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and
then fell swamping back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters
flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower
of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble
trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to the
attack; but maddened by yesterday’s fresh irons that corroded in him, Moby
Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven. The
wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead, beneath
the transparent skin, looked knitted together; as head on, he came churning
his tail among the boats; and once more flailed them apart; spilling out the
irons and lances from the two mates’ boats, and dashing in one side of the
upper part of their bows, but leaving Ahab’s almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the whale
swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he shot by them
again; at that moment a quick cry went up. Lashed round and round to the
fish’s back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which, during the past night,
the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him, the half torn
body of the Parsee was seen; his sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended
eyes turned full upon old Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

“Befooled, befooled!”—drawing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see thee
again.—Aye, and thou goest before; and this, _this_ then is the hearse that
thou didst promise. But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word. Where is
the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those boats are useless now;
repair them if ye can in time, and return to me; if not, Ahab is enough to
die—Down, men! the first thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand
in, that thing I harpoon. Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and
so obey me.—Where’s the whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the corpse
he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter had been but a
stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again steadily swimming
forward; and had almost passed the ship,—which thus far had been sailing in
the contrary direction to him, though for the present her headway had been
stopped. He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent upon
pursuing his own straight path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Starbuck, “not too late is it, even now, the third day, to
desist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that madly seekest
him!”

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled to
leeward, by both oars and canvas. And at last when Ahab was sliding by the
vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck’s face as he leaned over
the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and follow him, not too
swiftly, at a judicious interval. Glancing upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg,
and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were
rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side,
and were busily at work in repairing them. One after the other, through the
port-holes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask,
busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw
all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers
seemed driving a nail into his heart. But he rallied. And now marking that the
vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had
just gained that perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and
nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ running chase, and the resistance to his
swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some latent
deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White Whale’s way now
began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more;
though indeed the whale’s last start had not been so long a one as before. And
still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and
so pertinaciously stuck to the boat; and so continually bit at the plying
oars, that the blades became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in
the sea, at almost every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars. Pull on! ’tis
the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he muttered—“whether
these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all
alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the helm! let me pass,”—and so saying
two of the oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with the
White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance—as the whale
sometimes will—and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist, which,
thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled round his great, Monadnock hump; he
was even thus close to him; when, with body arched back, and both arms
lengthwise high-lifted to the poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far
fiercer curse into the hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the
socket, as if sucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically
rolled his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated part of
the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have been tossed into
the sea. As it was, three of the oarsmen—who foreknew not the precise instant
of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for its effects—these were flung
out; but so fell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again,
and rising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard
again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and
swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated, instantaneous
swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering sea. But when Ahab
cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line, and hold it so;
and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats, and tow the boat up to
the mark; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug, it
snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars! Burst in
upon him!”

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled round
to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution, catching sight of
the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing in it the source of all
his persecutions; bethinking it—it may be—a larger and nobler foe; of a
sudden, he bore down upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery
showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. “I grow blind; hands! stretch out
before me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oarsmen.

“Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for ever too
late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I see: the ship! the
ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the sledge-hammering
seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks burst through, and in an
instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves;
its half-wading, splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the
pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego’s mast-head hammer remained
suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as with a plaid,
then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own forward-flowing heart;
while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the bowsprit beneath, caught sight of
the down-coming monster just as soon as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of air, now
hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a woman’s fainting fit.
Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is this the end of all my bursting
prayers? all my life-long fidelities? Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady!
helmsman, steady. Nay, nay! Up helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his
unappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot
depart. My God, stand by me now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now help
Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Who
ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own unwinking eye? And now
poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is all too soft; would it were
stuffed with brushwood! I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun,
moon, and stars! I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up
his ghost. For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand
the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of
gulping soon! Why fly ye not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let
Stubb die in his drawers! A most mouldy and over salted death,
though;—cherries! cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we
die!”

“Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope my poor
mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will now come to her,
for the voyage is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers, bits
of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their hands, just as
they had darted from their various employments; all their enchanted eyes
intent upon the whale, which from side to side strangely vibrating his
predestinating head, sent a broad band of overspreading semicircular foam
before him as he rushed. Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in
his whole aspect, and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solid white
buttress of his forehead smote the ship’s starboard bow, till men and timbers
reeled. Some fell flat upon their faces. Like dislodged trucks, the heads of
the harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach, they
heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat; “its wood
could only be American!”

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its keel; but
turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far off the other bow,
but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a time, he lay quiescent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy hammer. Oh!
ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel; and only god-
bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and Pole-pointed prow,—death-
glorious ship! must ye then perish, and without me? Am I cut off from the last
fond pride of meanest shipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life!
Oh, now I feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief. Ho, ho! from all
your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll, thou
all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with thee; from
hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last breath at thee.
Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool! and since neither can be
mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to
thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_ , I give up the spear!”

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to clear it;
he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the neck, and
voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was shot out of the
boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the
rope’s final end flew out of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and
smiting the sea, disappeared in its depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The ship?
Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, bewildering mediums saw
her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous Fata Morgana; only the
uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or
fate, to their once lofty perches, the pagan harpooneers still maintained
their sinking lookouts on the sea. And now, concentric circles seized the lone
boat itself, and all its crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole,
and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex,
carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the sunken head
of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the erect spar yet
visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag, which calmly
undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying billows they almost
touched;—at that instant, a red arm and a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted
in the open air, in the act of nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the
subsiding spar. A sky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck
downwards from its natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag, and
incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept its broad
fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling
that etherial thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept
his hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks,
and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the
flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink to
hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, and helmeted
herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen white surf
beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the great shroud of the
sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.

  
  
  
  

## Epilogue

### “AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Because one did
survive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s disappearance, I was he whom the Fates
ordained to take the place of Ahab’s bowsman, when that bowsman assumed the
vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three men were tossed
from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern. So, floating on the margin
of the ensuing scene, and in full sight of it, when the halfspent suction of
the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing
vortex. When I reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool. Round and round,
then, and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of
that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining
that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason
of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with great
force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over, and
floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost one whole day and
night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The unharming sharks, they
glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed
with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and picked
me up at last. It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing
search after her missing children, only found another orphan.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY-DICK; OR THE WHALE ***

This file should be named 2701-h.htm or 2701-h.zip

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/2701/

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT
GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms
of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not
protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE  
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE  
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution
of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to
comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available
with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms
of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If
you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease
using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to
whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with
most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full
terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things
you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of
this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the
public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by
copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States,
we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all
references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will
support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the
work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this
work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what
you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your
country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading,
copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works
based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes
no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any
copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is
associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

> This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
> other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
> whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
> the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
> [www.gutenberg.org](https://www.gutenberg.org). If you are not located in
> the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you
> are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from
texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice
indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the
work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without
paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with
both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the
copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™
License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found
at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other
work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently
displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing
or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a
Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™
website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla
ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project
Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with
paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of
Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to
calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this
paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty
payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare
(or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
“Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in
writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to
the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user
to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project
Gutenberg™ works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money
paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is
discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of
Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in
this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort
to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on
which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or
other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other
medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark,
and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under
this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses,
including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE,
STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK
OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN
IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in
this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the
person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person
or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without
further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the
maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The
invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not
void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all
liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a)
distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration,
modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and
(c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts
of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project
Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3)
educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi
and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake
City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public
support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-
readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to
maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities
and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much
paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not
solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation
of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit
[www.gutenberg.org/donate](https://www.gutenberg.org/donate/).

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not
met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting
unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers
to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and
addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks,
online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
www.gutenberg.org/donate


  
  
  
  

## CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the solitary
night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the daylight look-
outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that’s all. Helm there;
steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. What a lovely day again! were it a
new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the angels, and this morning
the first of its throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that
world. Here’s food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks;
he only feels, feels, feels; _that’s_ tingling enough for mortal man! to
think’s audacity. God only has that right and privilege. Thinking is, or ought
to be, a coolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor
brains beat too much for that. And yet, I’ve sometimes thought my brain was
very calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
contents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is growing now;
this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like that sort of
common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy clefts of Greenland
ice or in Vesuvius lava. How the wild winds blow it; they whip it about me as
the torn shreds of split sails lash the tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind
that has no doubt blown ere this through prison corridors and cells, and wards
of hospitals, and ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as
fleeces. Out upon it!—it’s tainted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such
a wicked, miserable world. I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink there. And
yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever conquered it? In every
fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run tilting at it, and you but run
through it. Ha! a coward wind that strikes stark naked men, but will not stand
to receive a single blow. Even Ahab is a braver thing—a nobler thing than
_that_. Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that most
exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only
bodiless as objects, not as agents. There’s a most special, a most cunning,
oh, a most malicious difference! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s something all glorious and gracious in the wind. These warm Trade
Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in strong and
steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark, however the baser
currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiest Mississippies of the land
swift and swerve about, uncertain where to go at last. And by the eternal
Poles! these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on; these Trades,
or something like them—something so unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my
keeled soul along! To it! Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See the sun! Aye,
aye, it must be so. I’ve oversailed him. How, got the start? Aye, he’s chasing
_me_ now; not I, _him_ —that’s bad; I might have known it, too. Fool! the
lines—the harpoons he’s towing. Aye, aye, I have run him by last night. About!
about! Come down, all of ye, but the regular look outs! Man the braces!”

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod’s quarter,
so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced ship sailed
hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God keep us,
but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside wet my flesh. I
misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket. “We
should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straightway Starbuck did Ahab’s bidding, and once more
Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time itself now held long
breaths with keen suspense. But at last, some three points off the weather
bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the three mast-heads
three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it.

“Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far off to
lower yet, Mr. Starbuck. The sails shake! Stand over that helmsman with a top-
maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But let me have one more good
round look aloft here at the sea; there’s time for that. An old, old sight,
and yet somehow so young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it, a
boy, from the sand-hills of Nantucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as
to me. There’s a soft shower to leeward. Such lovely leewardings! They must
lead somewhere—to something else than common land, more palmy than the palms.
Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then; the better if
the bitterer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old mast-head! What’s
this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks. No such green weather
stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the difference now between man’s old age and
matter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in our hulls,
though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead
wood has the better of my live flesh every way. I can’t compare with it; and
I’ve known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the
most vital stuff of vital fathers. What’s that he said? he should still go
before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and all night
I’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye, aye, like many more
thou told’st direful truth as touching thyself, O Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy
shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep a good eye upon the whale, the while
I’m gone. We’ll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down
there, tied by head and tail.”

He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered through the
cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop’s stern,
Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the mate,—who
held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing, Starbuck!”

“Truth, sir: saddest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a billow that’s all one crested comb, Starbuck. I
am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my captain, my captain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a brave man
that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by the
crew!”

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-window there; “O
master, my master, come back!”

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the boat
leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when numbers
of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the hull,
maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time they dipped in the
water; and in this way accompanied the boat with their bites. It is a thing
not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks
at times apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures
hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east. But these were the
first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had
been first descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such tiger-
yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the
sharks—a matter sometimes well known to affect them,—however it was, they
seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others.

“Heart of wrought steel!” murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
following with his eyes the receding boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly to that
sight?—lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by them, open-
mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third day?—For when three days
flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be sure the first is the
morning, the second the noon, and the third the evening and the end of that
thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through
me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant,—fixed at the top of a
shudder! Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all
the past is somehow grown dim. Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind
me; boy! I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. Strangest problems of
life seem clearing; but clouds sweep between—Is my journey’s end coming? My
legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats it
yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!—stave it off—move, move! speak aloud!—Mast-head
there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft there!—keep thy keenest
eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho! again!—drive off that hawk! see!
he pecks—he tears the vane”—pointing to the red flag flying at the main-
truck—“Ha! he soars away with it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that
sight, oh Ahab!—shudder, shudder!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads—a
downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but intending to
be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a little sideways from the
vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-
beat waves hammered and hammered against the opposing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads drive them
in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and no hearse can be
mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then quickly
upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice, swiftly rising
to the surface. A low rumbling sound was heard; a subterraneous hum; and then
all held their breaths; as bedraggled with trailing ropes, and harpoons, and
lances, a vast form shot lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea. Shrouded in a
thin drooping veil of mist, it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and
then fell swamping back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters
flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower
of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble
trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to the
attack; but maddened by yesterday’s fresh irons that corroded in him, Moby
Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven. The
wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead, beneath
the transparent skin, looked knitted together; as head on, he came churning
his tail among the boats; and once more flailed them apart; spilling out the
irons and lances from the two mates’ boats, and dashing in one side of the
upper part of their bows, but leaving Ahab’s almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the whale
swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he shot by them
again; at that moment a quick cry went up. Lashed round and round to the
fish’s back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which, during the past night,
the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him, the half torn
body of the Parsee was seen; his sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended
eyes turned full upon old Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

“Befooled, befooled!”—drawing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see thee
again.—Aye, and thou goest before; and this, _this_ then is the hearse that
thou didst promise. But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word. Where is
the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those boats are useless now;
repair them if ye can in time, and return to me; if not, Ahab is enough to
die—Down, men! the first thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand
in, that thing I harpoon. Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and
so obey me.—Where’s the whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the corpse
he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter had been but a
stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again steadily swimming
forward; and had almost passed the ship,—which thus far had been sailing in
the contrary direction to him, though for the present her headway had been
stopped. He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent upon
pursuing his own straight path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Starbuck, “not too late is it, even now, the third day, to
desist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that madly seekest
him!”

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled to
leeward, by both oars and canvas. And at last when Ahab was sliding by the
vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck’s face as he leaned over
the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and follow him, not too
swiftly, at a judicious interval. Glancing upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg,
and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were
rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side,
and were busily at work in repairing them. One after the other, through the
port-holes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask,
busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw
all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers
seemed driving a nail into his heart. But he rallied. And now marking that the
vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had
just gained that perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and
nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ running chase, and the resistance to his
swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some latent
deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White Whale’s way now
began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more;
though indeed the whale’s last start had not been so long a one as before. And
still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and
so pertinaciously stuck to the boat; and so continually bit at the plying
oars, that the blades became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in
the sea, at almost every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars. Pull on! ’tis
the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he muttered—“whether
these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all
alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the helm! let me pass,”—and so saying
two of the oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with the
White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance—as the whale
sometimes will—and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist, which,
thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled round his great, Monadnock hump; he
was even thus close to him; when, with body arched back, and both arms
lengthwise high-lifted to the poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far
fiercer curse into the hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the
socket, as if sucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically
rolled his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated part of
the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have been tossed into
the sea. As it was, three of the oarsmen—who foreknew not the precise instant
of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for its effects—these were flung
out; but so fell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again,
and rising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard
again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and
swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated, instantaneous
swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering sea. But when Ahab
cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line, and hold it so;
and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats, and tow the boat up to
the mark; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug, it
snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars! Burst in
upon him!”

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled round
to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution, catching sight of
the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing in it the source of all
his persecutions; bethinking it—it may be—a larger and nobler foe; of a
sudden, he bore down upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery
showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. “I grow blind; hands! stretch out
before me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oarsmen.

“Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for ever too
late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I see: the ship! the
ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the sledge-hammering
seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks burst through, and in an
instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves;
its half-wading, splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the
pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego’s mast-head hammer remained
suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as with a plaid,
then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own forward-flowing heart;
while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the bowsprit beneath, caught sight of
the down-coming monster just as soon as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of air, now
hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a woman’s fainting fit.
Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is this the end of all my bursting
prayers? all my life-long fidelities? Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady!
helmsman, steady. Nay, nay! Up helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his
unappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot
depart. My God, stand by me now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now help
Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Who
ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own unwinking eye? And now
poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is all too soft; would it were
stuffed with brushwood! I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun,
moon, and stars! I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up
his ghost. For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand
the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of
gulping soon! Why fly ye not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let
Stubb die in his drawers! A most mouldy and over salted death,
though;—cherries! cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we
die!”

“Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope my poor
mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will now come to her,
for the voyage is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers, bits
of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their hands, just as
they had darted from their various employments; all their enchanted eyes
intent upon the whale, which from side to side strangely vibrating his
predestinating head, sent a broad band of overspreading semicircular foam
before him as he rushed. Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in
his whole aspect, and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solid white
buttress of his forehead smote the ship’s starboard bow, till men and timbers
reeled. Some fell flat upon their faces. Like dislodged trucks, the heads of
the harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach, they
heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat; “its wood
could only be American!”

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its keel; but
turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far off the other bow,
but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a time, he lay quiescent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy hammer. Oh!
ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel; and only god-
bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and Pole-pointed prow,—death-
glorious ship! must ye then perish, and without me? Am I cut off from the last
fond pride of meanest shipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life!
Oh, now I feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief. Ho, ho! from all
your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll, thou
all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with thee; from
hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last breath at thee.
Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool! and since neither can be
mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to
thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_ , I give up the spear!”

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to clear it;
he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the neck, and
voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was shot out of the
boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the
rope’s final end flew out of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and
smiting the sea, disappeared in its depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The ship?
Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, bewildering mediums saw
her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous Fata Morgana; only the
uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or
fate, to their once lofty perches, the pagan harpooneers still maintained
their sinking lookouts on the sea. And now, concentric circles seized the lone
boat itself, and all its crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole,
and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex,
carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the sunken head
of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the erect spar yet
visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag, which calmly
undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying billows they almost
touched;—at that instant, a red arm and a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted
in the open air, in the act of nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the
subsiding spar. A sky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck
downwards from its natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag, and
incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept its broad
fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling
that etherial thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept
his hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks,
and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the
flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink to
hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, and helmeted
herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen white surf
beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the great shroud of the
sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.

  
  
  
  

## Epilogue

### “AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Because one did
survive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s disappearance, I was he whom the Fates
ordained to take the place of Ahab’s bowsman, when that bowsman assumed the
vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three men were tossed
from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern. So, floating on the margin
of the ensuing scene, and in full sight of it, when the halfspent suction of
the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing
vortex. When I reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool. Round and round,
then, and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of
that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining
that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason
of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with great
force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over, and
floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost one whole day and
night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The unharming sharks, they
glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed
with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and picked
me up at last. It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing
search after her missing children, only found another orphan.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY-DICK; OR THE WHALE ***

This file should be named 2701-h.htm or 2701-h.zip

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/2701/

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT
GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms
of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not
protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE  
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE  
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution
of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to
comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available
with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms
of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If
you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease
using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to
whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with
most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full
terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things
you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of
this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the
public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by
copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States,
we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all
references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will
support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the
work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this
work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what
you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your
country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading,
copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works
based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes
no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any
copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is
associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

> This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
> other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
> whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
> the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
> [www.gutenberg.org](https://www.gutenberg.org). If you are not located in
> the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you
> are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from
texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice
indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the
work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without
paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with
both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the
copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™
License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found
at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other
work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently
displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing
or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a
Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™
website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla
ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project
Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with
paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of
Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to
calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this
paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty
payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare
(or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
“Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in
writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to
the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user
to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project
Gutenberg™ works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money
paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is
discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of
Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in
this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort
to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on
which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or
other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other
medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark,
and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under
this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses,
including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE,
STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK
OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN
IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in
this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the
person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person
or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without
further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the
maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The
invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not
void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all
liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a)
distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration,
modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and
(c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts
of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project
Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3)
educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi
and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake
City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public
support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-
readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to
maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities
and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much
paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not
solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation
of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit
[www.gutenberg.org/donate](https://www.gutenberg.org/donate/).

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not
met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting
unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers
to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and
addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks,
online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
www.gutenberg.org/donate


